Bestiary
Second Edition
Bestiary
Rulebook
Unleash the Beasts
Over 400 of fantasy’s fiercest foes burst from the pages of this enormous
compendium of the most popular and commonly encountered creatures in the
world of Pathfinder! From familiar enemies like orcs, dragons, and vampires to
new horrors like the nightmarish nilith and the three-headed mukradi, to suitable
servants for summoners of every alignment, this must-have companion to the
Pathfinder Core Rulebook is crawling with creatures to challenge characters of
any level.
PZO2102
paizo.com/pathfinder Printed in China.
Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter
BESTIARY
Paizo Inc.
7120 185th Ave NE, Ste 120
Redmond, WA 98052-0577
paizo.com
Table of Contents
Introduction 5
Monsters A-Z 8
Appendix 342
Ability Glossary 342
Creature Traits 344
New Rituals 347
New Languages 348
Creatures by Type 348
Creatures by Level 350
GAME DESIGNERS
Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter
ADDITIONAL DESIGN
Alexander Augunas, John Compton,
Paris Crenshaw, Adam Daigle, Eleanor Ferron,
Leo Glass, Thurston Hillman, James Jacobs,
Jason Keeley, Lyz Liddell, Ron Lundeen,
Robert G. McCreary, Tim Nightengale, Alex Riggs,
David N. Ross, Michael Sayre, Chris S. Sims,
Jeffrey Swank, Jason Tondro, Tonya Woldridge,
and Linda Zayas-Palmer
DEVELOPMENT LEADS
Adam Daigle, James Jacobs, and Patrick Renie
ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Linda Zayas-Palmer
EDITORS
Amirali Attar Olyaee, Judy Bauer, James Case,
Adam Daigle, Leo Glass, Jason Keeley, Avi Kool,
Lyz Liddell, Luis Loza, Erik Mona, Adrian Ng,
Lacy Pellazar, Patrick Renie, and Jason Tondro
COVER ARTIST
Wayne Reynolds
INTERIOR ARTISTS
Klaher Baklaher, Helge C. Balzer, Luca Bancone,
Enrique Barajas, Giorgio Baroni, Diana Campos,
Yanis Cardin, Javier Charro, Sergio Cosmai,
Emile Denis, Michele Esposito, Mirko Faloni,
Jorge Fares, Michele Giorgi,
Miguel Regodón Harkness, Matthias Kinnigkeit,
Ksenia Kozhevnikova, Josef Kucera,
Víctor Manuel Leza Moreno, Raph Lomotan,
David Melvin, Mark Molnar, Johnny Morrow,
Andrea Tentori Montalto, Will O’Brien,
Mirco Paganessi, Mary Jane Pajaron,
Mikhail Palamarchuk, Angelo Peluso,
Anna Podedworna, Scott Purdy, Maichol Quinto,
Wayne Reynolds, Kiki Moch Rizky, Riccardo Rullo,
Henrik Rosenborg, Bryan Sola, Firat Solhan,
Yasen Stoilov, Matias Tapia, Allison Theus,
Brian Valeza, and Ben Wootten
ART DIRECTION AND GRAPHIC DESIGN
Sarah E. Robinson and Sonja Morris
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
James Jacobs
PUBLISHER
Erik Mona
SPECIAL THANKS
Dave Arneson, Monte Cook, Gary Gygax,
Daniel Solis, Jonathan Tweet, Skip Williams, and
all the participants in the Pathfinder Playtest
Alphabetical Listing Of Monsters
Aasimar Redeemer (planar scion) 263
Adamantine Golem 188
Adult Black Dragon 105
Adult Blue Dragon 108
Adult Brass Dragon 118
Adult Bronze Dragon 120
Adult Copper Dragon 122
Adult Gold Dragon 124
Adult Green Dragon 110
Adult Red Dragon 112
Adult Silver Dragon 126
Adult White Dragon 114
Air Mephit 150
Alchemical Golem 185
Alghollthu Master 14
Ancient Black Dragon 106
Ancient Blue Dragon 108
Ancient Brass Dragon 118
Ancient Bronze Dragon 120
Ancient Copper Dragon 122
Ancient Gold Dragon 125
Ancient Green Dragon 110
Ancient Red Dragon 112
Ancient Silver Dragon 127
Ancient White Dragon 115
Animated Armor 20
Animated Broom 20
Animated Statue 20
Ankhrav 22
Ankylosaurus (dinosaur) 97
Annis Hag 201
Arbiter (aeon) 8
Arboreal Regent 25
Arboreal Warden 24
Astradaemon (daemon) 72
Astral Deva (angel) 18
Awakened Tree 25
Axiomite (aeon) 9
Azure Worm 57
Balisse (angel) 18
Ball Python (snake) 302
Balor (demon) 82
Banshee 34
Baomal 35
Barbazu (devil) 88
Barghest 36
Basilisk 38
Black Pudding (ooze) 255
Bloodseeker 42
Boar 43
Boggard Scout 44
Boggard Swampseer 45
Boggard Warrior 44
Brain Collector 46
Brine Shark (water elemental) 152
Brontosaurus (dinosaur) 99
Bugbear Thug 47
Bugbear Tormentor 47
Bulette 48
Bunyip 49
Cacodaemon (daemon) 70
Caligni Creeper 50
Caligni Dancer 50
Caligni Stalker 51
Cassisian (angel) 16
Catfolk Pouncer 54
Cauthooj 55
Cave Bear 40
Centaur 60
Centipede Swarm 61
Ceustodaemon (daemon) 71
Changeling Exile (changeling) 62
Chimera 63
Choral (angel) 17
Chuul 64
Cinder Rat (fire elemental) 148
Clay Golem 186
Cloaker 65
Cloud Giant 173
Cockatrice 66
Crag Linnorm 224
Crimson Worm 58
Crocodile 67
Cyclops 68
Daeodon (boar) 43
Dandasuka (rakshasa) 274
Dark Naga 242
Deadly Mantis 233
Deep Gnome Rockwarden 75
Deep Gnome Scout 74
Deep Gnome Warrior 75
Deinosuchus (crocodile) 67
BESTIARY
Deinonychus (dinosaur) 96
Demilich 222
Dero Magister 85
Dero Stalker 84
Dero Strangler 85
Desert Drake 135
Dezullon 94
Dhampir Wizard (dhampir) 95
Dire Wolf 334
Djinni (genie) 163
Doppelganger 103
Dragon Turtle 128
Drakauthix 129
Drider (fleshwarp) 159
Drow Fighter 136
Drow Priestess 137
Drow Rogue 137
Dryad (nymph) 246
Dryad Queen (nymph) 249
Duergar Bombardier 138
Duergar Sharpshooter 138
Duergar Taskmaster 139
Dullahan 140
Duskwalker Ghost Hunter (planar scion)262
Eagle 141
Earth Mephit 150
Efreeti (genie) 164
Elananx 143
Electric Eel 142
Elemental Avalanche 147
Elemental Hurricane 145
Elemental Inferno 149
Elemental Tsunami 153
Elephant 154
Erinys (devil) 89
Ether Spider 155
Ettin 156
Faceless Stalker (alghollthu) 13
Faerie Dragon 157
Fire Giant 172
Fire Mephit 150
Firewyrm (fire elemental) 149
Flame Drake 131
Flash Beetle 41
Flesh Golem 184
Frost Drake 134
Frost Giant 171
Fungus Leshy 219
Gancanagh (azata) 31
Gargoyle 161
Gelatinous Cube (ooze) 254
Gelugon (devil) 91
Ghaele (azata) 33
Ghast (ghoul) 169
Ghost Commoner 167
Ghost Mage 167
Ghoul 169
Giant Anaconda (snake) 303
Giant Animated Statue 21
Giant Bat 39
Giant Centipede 61
Giant Eagle 141
Giant Flytrap 160
Giant Frilled Lizard 229
Giant Gecko (lizard) 228
Giant Mantis 233
Giant Monitor Lizard 228
Giant Moray Eel 142
Giant Octopus 250
Giant Rat 276
Giant Scorpion 285
Giant Stag Beetle 41
Giant Tarantula (spider) 307
Giant Viper (snake) 303
Giant Wasp 324
Gibbering Mouther 176
Gimmerling 177
Glabrezu (demon) 79
Gnoll Cultist 179
Gnoll Hunter 178
Gnoll Sergeant 179
Goblin Commando 180
Goblin Dog 182
Goblin Pyro 181
Goblin War Chanter 181
Goblin Warrior 180
Gogiteth 183
Goliath Spider 307
Gorilla (ape) 23
Gourd Leshy 218
Graveknight 191
Great Cyclops 69
Great White Shark 291
Greater Barghest 37
Greater Nightmare 244
Greater Shadow 289
Green Hag 201
Griffon 194
Grig (sprite) 308
Grikkitog 195
Grim Reaper 196
Grizzly Bear 40
Grothlut (fleshwarp) 158
Guard Dog 102
Guardian Naga 243
Gug 198
Guthallath 199
Harpy 204
Hell Hound 205
Hill Giant 170
Hive Mother (ankhrav) 22
Hobgoblin Archer 207
Hobgoblin General 207
Hobgoblin Soldier 206
Homunculus 208
Horned Archon 27
Hunting Spider 306
Hyaenodon (hyena) 211
Hydra 210
Hyena 211
Ice Linnorm 225
Imp (devil) 87
Invisible Stalker (air elemental) 144
Iron Golem 188
Janni (genie) 162
Jinkin (gremlin) 193
Jungle Drake 132
Kapoacinth (gargoyle) 161
Keketar (protean) 268
Kobold Dragon Mage 213
Kobold Scout 213
Kobold Warrior 212
Kolyarut (aeon) 10
Kraken 214
Krooth 215
Lamia 216
Lamia Matriarch 217
Lantern Archon 26
Leaf Leshy 218
Legion Archon 28
Lemure (devil) 86
Leopard (cat) 52
Lesser Death (grim reaper) 197
Leukodaemon (daemon) 71
Lich 221
Lillend (azata) 32
Lion (cat) 52
Living Landslide (earth elemental) 146
Living Waterfall (water elemental) 152
Living Whirlwind (air elemental) 144
Living Wildfire (fire elemental) 148
Lizardfolk Defender 230
Lizardfolk Scout 231
Lizardfolk Stargazer 231
Lyrakien (azata) 30
Mammoth (elephant) 154
Manticore 232
Marid (genie) 165
Marilith (demon) 81
Medusa 234
Megalodon (shark) 291
Megaprimatus (ape) 23
Merfolk Warrior 235
Merfolk Wavepriest 235
Mimic 236
5

4
Minotaur 237
Mitflit (gremlin) 192
Morrigna (psychopomp) 270
Mu Spore 238
Mukradi 239
Mummy Guardian 240
Mummy Pharaoh 240
Naiad (nymph) 246
Naiad Queen (nymph) 248
Naunet (protean) 267
Nessian Warhound (hell hound) 205
Night Hag 202
Nightmare 244
Nilith 245
Nosoi (psychopomp) 270
Ochre Jelly (ooze) 254
Ofalth 251
Ogre Boss 253
Ogre Glutton 252
Ogre Warrior 252
Orc Brute 256
Orc Warchief 257
Orc Warrior 257
Otyugh 258
Owlbear 259
Pegasus 260
Phoenix 261
Phistophilus (devil) 89
Pit Fiend (devil) 92
Pixie (sprite) 309
Plague Zombie 340
Pleroma (aeon) 10
Poltergeist 264
Poracha 265
Pteranodon (pterosaur) 272
Pugwampi (gremlin) 192
Purple Worm 56
Quasit (demon) 76
Quatoid (water elemental) 152
Quelaunt 273
Quetzalcoatlus (pterosaur) 272
Raja Rakshasa 275
Rat Swarm 276
Ratfolk Grenadier 277
Redcap 278
Reefclaw 279
Remorhaz 280
Riding Dog 102
Riding Horse 209
Riding Pony (horse) 209
River Drake 131
Roc 281
Roper 282
Rune Giant 174
Rust Monster 283
Salamander (fire elemental) 148
Satyr 284
Scorpion Swarm 285
Sea Devil Baron 287
Sea Devil Brute 287
Sea Devil Scout 286
Sea Hag 200
Sea Serpent 288
Sewer Ooze 254
Shadow 289
Shaitan (genie) 163
Shambler 290
Shemhazian (demon) 80
Shield Archon 29
Shining Child 292
Shoggoth 293
Shuln 294
Simurgh 295
Sinspawn 296
Skeletal Champion 298
Skeletal Giant 299
Skeletal Horse 299
Skeletal Hulk 299
Skeleton Guard 298
Skulltaker 300
Skum (alghollthu) 12
Slurk 301
Smilodon (cat) 53
Snapping Flytrap 160
Sod Hound (earth elemental) 146
Soulbound Doll 304
Sphinx 305
Spider Swarm 306
Sprite 308
Stegosaurus (dinosaur) 98
Stone Giant 170
Stone Golem 187
Stone Mauler (earth elemental) 147
Storm Giant 173
Storm Lord (air elemental) 145
Succubus (demon) 77
Tarn Linnorm 226
Tengu Sneak 310
Terotricus 311
Tidal Master (water elemental) 153
Tiefling Adept (planar scion) 262
Tiger (cat) 52
Tor Linnorm 227
Treerazer 312
Triceratops (dinosaur) 98
Troll 314
Troll King 314
Tyrannosaurus (dinosaur) 100
Unicorn 316
Uthul 317
Vampire Bat Swarm 39
Vampire Count 320
Vampire Mastermind 321
Vampire Spawn Rogue 320
Veiled Master (alghollthu) 15
Velociraptor (dinosaur) 96
Viper (snake) 302
Voidworm (protean) 266
Vrock (demon) 78
War Horse 209
War Pony (horse) 209
Warg 322
Warsworn 323
Wasp Swarm 324
Water Mephit 151
Web Lurker 325
Wemmuth 326
Wendigo 327
Werebear 330
Wererat 329
Werewolf 330
Wight 332
Will-O’-Wisp 333
Winter Wolf (warg) 322
Wolf 334
Wraith 335
Wyvern (drake) 133
Xorn (earth elemental) 146
Xulgath Leader 337
Xulgath Skulker 337
Xulgath Warrior 336
Yeti 338
Young Black Dragon 105
Young Blue Dragon 107
Young Brass Dragon 117
Young Bronze Dragon 119
Young Copper Dragon 121
Young Gold Dragon 124
Young Green Dragon 109
Young Red Dragon 112
Young Silver Dragon 126
Young White Dragon 113
Zaramuun 339
Zephyr Hawk (air elemental) 144
Zombie Brute 341
Zombie Hulk 341
Zombie Shambler 340
5

4
Welcome to the Pathfinder Bestiary! Inside this tome of
creatures, you’ll find haughty celestials and ravenous
fiends, fierce animals and strange moving plants, new
peoples to interact with and horrid monsters to hunt
down. And while this book details hundreds of creatures,
it’s only a portion of the myriad interesting creatures that
populate the world of Pathfinder.
To use this book, you need the Pathfinder Core
Rulebook, which contains the rules of the game and gives
you further understanding of each creature’s rules and
its place in the world. Using both of these books allows
you as the Game Master (or GM) to create stories of
grand adventure and populate them with fearsome foes,
possible allies, and friendly guides.
Most of the sections of this book describe a creature or
a group of related creatures, present their game statistics,
illustrate their place within the game world, and provide
details about their behavior or society.
In this introduction, you can find advice on how
to play these creatures in the game, including how to
read and use their statistics, advice on roleplaying their
interactions with player characters, and guidance on
adjusting creature statistics to fit the needs of your setting.
Lastly, the appendix in the back of the book contains
sections that provide information about frequently used
monster abilities, creature traits, new rituals, uncommon
languages, and lists of monsters sorted by type and level.
Playing Creatures
While the other players portray their characters, you
as the Game Master get to play everyone else. This
section provides the basics for using the creatures in this
book. It guides you through the process of reading and
understanding the creatures’ statistics so the creature can
either provide a threat or serve as an ally in and out of
combat. It also provides general advice for roleplaying
creatures to help provide more depth to the creatures in
your game’s world.
Reading Creature Statistics
Each creature’s rules appear in a stat block, with a
structure similar to those of feats, spells, and magic items.
Because creatures have more abilities than those game
elements, however, their statistics include more entries,
many of which have special formats.
A creature’s traits line sometimes begins with a rarity;
if the creature’s rarity is common, no rarity is listed. The
next entry is its alignment, which is given as a one- or
two-letter abbreviation (LG for lawful good, N for neutral,
CE for chaotic evil, and so on); these abbreviations are
listed comprehensively on page 345. Next is the creature’s
size (Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge, or Gargantuan).
Any other traits are then listed. The traits appearing in
Introduction
this book, including some traits from the Pathfinder Core
Rulebook, can be found in Creature Traits on page 344.
Actions and activities the creature can use have the
appropriate icons next to those abilities’ names noting
how many actions they require. A creature always has the
requisite proficiency ranks or other abilities required to use
what’s listed in its stat block. For instance, a spellcasting
creature can perform the Cast a Spell activity, and a
creature is never untrained with any of its items.
Some abilities are abbreviated in stat blocks and
described in full in the Ability Glossary on pages 342–344.
CREATURE NAME LEVEL
RARITY TRAIT ALIGNMENT ABBREVIATION SIZE OTHER TRAITS
Perception The creature’s Perception modifier is listed here,
followed by any special senses.
Languages The languages for a typical creature of that kind are
listed here, followed by any special communication abilities.
If a creature lacks this entry, it cannot communicate with or
understand another creature through language.
Skills The creature is trained or better in these skills. For
untrained skills, use the corresponding ability modifier.
Ability Modifiers The creature’s ability modifiers are listed here.
Items Any significant gear the creature carries is listed here.
Interaction Abilities Special abilities that affect how a creature
perceives and interacts with the world are listed here.
AC, followed by any special bonuses to AC; Saving Throws A
special bonus to a specific save appears in parentheses after
that save’s bonus. Any special bonuses to all three saving
throws against particular types of effects are listed after the
three saves.
HP, followed by automatic abilities that affect the creature’s
Hit Points or healing; Immunities; Weaknesses; Resistances
Any immunities, weaknesses, or resistances the creature
has are listed here.
Automatic Abilities The creature’s auras, any abilities that
automatically affect its defenses, and the like are listed here.
Reactive Abilities Free actions or reactions that are usually
triggered when it’s not the creature’s turn are listed here.
Speed, followed by any other Speeds or movement abilities.
Melee [one-action] (traits; some weapon traits, such as deadly, include
their calculations for convenience) The name of the weapon
or unarmed attack the creature uses for a melee Strike,
followed by the attack modifier and traits in parentheses.
If a creature has any abilities or gear that would affect its
attack modifier, such as a weapon with a +1 weapon potency
rune, those calculations are already included, Damage
amount and damage type, plus any additional effects (this
entry is Effect if the Strike doesn’t deal damage).
Ranged [one-action] As Melee, but also lists range or range increment
with traits, Damage as Melee.
Spells The entry starts with the magical tradition and
whether the spells are prepared or spontaneous, followed 
7

6
by the DC (and attack modifier if any spells require spell
attack rolls). Spells are listed by level, followed by cantrips.
A spell prepared multiple times lists the number of times
in parentheses-for example, “(×2).” Spontaneous spells list
the number of spell slots after the spell level.
Innate Spells These are listed like other spells, but can also
include constant, at-will, and focus spells. If the creature
has a focus spell as an innate spell, it works like other innate
spells with listed uses, rather than costing Focus Points.
Spells that can be used an unlimited number of times list
“(at will)” after the spell’s name. Constant spells appear at
the end, separated by level. Rules for constant and at-will
spells appear on page 342 in the Ability Glossary.
Focus Spells If a creature has focus spells, this entry lists the
spells’ level, the Focus Points in the creature’s focus pool, the
DC, and those spells.
Rituals Any rituals the creature can cast appear here.
Offensive or Proactive Abilities Any actions, activities, or
abilities that automatically affect the creature’s offense, as
well as free actions or reactions that are usually triggered
on the creature’s turn, appear here in alphabetical order.
Roleplaying Creatures
Whether it’s an adversary or a potential ally, a creature
might have a very different worldview than the PCs. When
roleplaying creatures, think about how they experience
the world differently due to their senses, physiology, and
habitat. Each creature entry in this book gives you some
context about the creature’s worldview, motivations,
ecology, and societies. Many sections have sidebars that
provide relevant facts about creatures (labeled with the
icons listed in the Sidebar Icons section on page 7). You can
use the information in each creature entry as cues on how
to roleplaying the creature in and out of combat. These
cues can be as simple as a difference in idioms (perhaps
saying “in the other tentacle” rather than “on the other
hand”) and as complex as determining motivations, hopes,
and dreams for an individual creature. Understanding a
creature you’re playing also informs what tactics they’ll
use, as well as whether they are willing to surrender or flee
when things don’t go their way.
Adjusting Creatures
Sometimes you might need to customize a creature based
on the needs of your story or the narrative circumstances as
your story unfolds. This section guides you through some
basic strategies you can use to adjust creatures. It includes
quick adjustments you can make to a creature to alter its
level. You might also need to adjust a creature’s languages
or gear, or know its proficiency ranks in skills or Perception.
Combat Power
The creatures presented in this book have appropriate
statistics for their levels. In many cases, you can make
relatively minor adjustments, called elite and weak
adjustments, to their statistics to make them function 1 level
higher or lower than presented.
Elite and weak adjustments work best with creatures
that focus on physical combat. These adjustments
overstate the normal numerical gains the creature would
make from increasing its level to make up for the lack
of new special abilities. As such, when applied multiple
times to the same creature, these adjustments cause its
statistics to become less accurate for the creature’s level.
These adjustments have a greater effect on the power
level of low-level creatures; applying elite adjustments to
a level –1 creature gives you one closer to 1st level, and
applying weak adjustments to a 1st-level creature gives
you one whose level is closer to –1.
Creatures that cast spells or rely on noncombat abilities
typically need specific adjustments to those spells or abilities.
Elite Adjustments
Sometimes you’ll want a creature that’s just a bit more
powerful than normal so that you can present a challenge
that would otherwise be trivial, or show that one enemy
is stronger than its kin. To do this quickly and easily,
apply the elite adjustments to its statistics as follows:
• Increase the creature’s AC, attack modifiers, DCs,
saving throws, Perception, and skill modifiers by 2.
• Increase the damage of its Strikes and other offensive
abilities by 2. If the creature has limits on how many
times or how often it can use an ability (such as a
spellcaster’s spells or a dragon’s Breath Weapon),
increase the damage by 4 instead.
• Increase the creature’s Hit Points based on its starting
level (see the table below).
Starting Level HP Increase
1 or lower 10
2–4 15
5–19 20
20+ 30
Weak Adjustments
Sometimes you’ll want a creature that’s weaker than
normal so you can use a creature that would otherwise
be too challenging, or show that one enemy is weaker
than its kin. To do this quickly and easily, apply the weak
adjustments to its statistics as follows.
• Decrease the creature’s AC, attack modifiers, DCs,
saving throws, and skill modifiers by 2.
• Decrease the damage of its Strikes and other offensive
abilities by 2. If the creature has limits on how many
times or how often it can use an ability (such as a
spellcaster’s spells or a dragon’s Breath Weapon),
decrease the damage by 4 instead.
• Decrease the creature’s HP based on its starting level.
Starting Level HP Decrease
1–2 –10
3–5 –15
6–20 –20
21+ –30
7

6
Languages
The languages listed in a creature’s entry are what a typical
creature of that type knows. However, you might want to
vary these based on the specific creature. For instance, if
a creature is interested in speaking with or understanding
the people in its region, it would most likely know the
language those people speak. This language is most often
Common, but you can give it a more appropriate language
depending on what region the creature lives in (such as
Undercommon if the creature lives in the Darklands).
Beings from other planes are unlikely to know any
languages from the Material Plane unless they frequently
travel there. If such a creature knows a mortal language,
then that creature likely is interested in communicating
with mortals. This language is most often Common,
although such keep in mind that such a creature should
speak Common only if it specifically travels to or studies
your campaign’s world and region above others.
The languages in Pathfinder can be found on
page 65 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook and in the
New Languages section of this book (page 348).
Gear
Some creatures rely on gear, like armor and weapons. You
might need statistics for such a creature that doesn’t have
its gear. For example, a creature could be Disarmed, it
might be ambushed while it’s out of its armor, or one of its
worn magic items could be disabled with dispel magic. In
most cases, you can simply improvise, but if you want to be
more exacting, use these guidelines for weapons and armor.
If a creature loses its weapon, it might draw another
weapon or use an unarmed attack. If it uses a Strike it
doesn’t have listed in its stat block, find a Strike entry
for the creature that most closely matches the substitute,
reduce the attack modifier by 2, and use the damage
dice for the new Strike. If the creature needs to make an
unarmed attack and doesn’t have one listed in its stat
block, it uses the statistics for a fist (Core Rulebook 280).
If the creature loses a weapon with a weapon potency
rune, you usually should reduce the attack modifier by 2
plus the bonus granted by the weapon’s potency rune for
the new weapon. For example, if the creature is Disarmed
of its +1 mace, then you would reduce the attack modifier
by 3 instead of 2 for the new Strike.
If a creature doesn’t have its armor, find the armor in
its Items entry and reduce the creature’s AC by that
armor’s item bonus (Core Rulebook 275). If the armor
has a potency rune, increase the reduction as appropriate;
for example, if the creature has a suit of +2 chain mail in
its statistics, and the characters catch the creature without
its armor, you would reduce the creature’s AC by 6 instead
of 4. If the armor has a resilient rune, reduce the creature’s
saves based on the rune’s type (1 for resilient, 2 for greater
resilient, or 3 for major resilient).
Skills, Perception, and Proficiency
In some situations, such as when a creature is trying to
Disable a PC’s snare, you need to know the creature’s
proficiency rank. Creatures are trained in the skills listed in
their stat blocks. Because monsters aren’t created using the
same rules as PCs, they are untrained in skills that aren’t
listed. A creature usually has expert proficiency in its listed
skills around 5th level, master proficiency around 9th level,
and legendary proficiency around 17th level. A creature
might need a certain proficiency rank in Perception to detect
certain things. Many creatures have expert proficiency in
Perception, and improve to master proficiency around 7th
level and legendary proficiency around 13th level.
At your discretion, creatures with world-class aptitude at
a particular skill or in Perception, such as a doppelganger
with Deception, might have a higher rank in that skill
or Perception.
Sidebar Icons
Each sidebar in a creature section is marked with an icon
identifying the type of information it contains.
Advice and Rules Related Creatures
Additional Lore Treasure and Rewards
Locations 
A-C
9

8
Aeon
Aeons have always been the caretakers of reality and defenders of the natural
order of balance. Each type of aeon takes on some form of duality in its
manifestation and works either to shape the multiverse within the aspects
of this duality in some way, or to correct imbalances to the perfect order of
existence. Aeons can bring weal or woe when they appear in a region, and
their machinations can raise a nation, raze it, or restore it from ruin. Their
reasons are their own, and they rarely share their motivations with others-
they simply create the results they insist through their strange envisioning
communication are necessary to maintain the balance of the multiverse.
As a result of recent shifts in reality, aeons have begun to reassert a
presence in the perfect planar city of Axis. To the aeons, this is merely the
latest in a recurring cycle, albeit one that mortals have not yet borne witness
to. Once regarded as an independent faction, the living machines known as
inevitables are now revealed as having been agents of the aeons all along, and
while inevitables have their own shared themes and features, they are very
much living but constructed manifestations of the aeons’ war against
imbalance-particularly with regard to how this war is waged against
the forces of chaos.
Aeons have a name for this cyclic return, in which they welcome
the industrious axiomites back to their fold and bring the inevitables
once again under their control: the “Convergence.” At the onset of the
Convergence, a council of pleroma aeons appeared in the Eternal City of
Axis, where they revealed that axiomites were wayward aeons, split off
long ago to pursue the act of creation. With the latest cycle of change it
was time for the axiomites and their creations, the inevitables, to rejoin
the aeon cause. While most axiomites and inevitables fell in line, realizing
perhaps on a fundamental level of reality that what the aeons said was the
truth, some refused to heed the call and waited for the wrath of the aeons-
but that wrath has yet to come. The dual-natured aeons have responded
to those who have declined in confusing ways. With some they treat and
even bargain, while a handful of others they have destroyed, and a few
have been exterminated by the axiomites and allied inevitables. But most
of these quiet insurgents they leave alone, allowing these axiomites to
continue to create in peace and the inevitables to continue with their
duties. How-or if-this Convergence will end is as little understood as
the aeons themselves.
Arbiter
These spherical inevitables are scouts and diplomats. Found throughout
the multiverse, they have traditionally kept watch over on chaos and its
agents. With the announcement of the Convergence, many arbiters now
serve as go-betweens among the aeon alliance and its mortal associates.
ARBITER CREATURE 1
LN TINY AEON INEVITABLE MONITOR
Perception +7; darkvision, detect alignment (chaotic only), locate inevitable
Languages Celestial, Common, Infernal, Utopian
Skills Acrobatics +9, Axis Lore +5, Diplomacy +6, Stealth +9
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +1
Locate Inevitable An arbiter can always sense the direction of the nearest non-arbiter
inevitable on the plane, but it cannot sense the range of the inevitable.
Items shortsword
AC 16; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +7; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 22; Immunities death effects, disease, emotion, poison, unconscious; Weaknesses
chaotic 3; Resistances electricity 3
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet
AEON DIVINITIES
Whether the aeons serve an actual
divinity, a philosophical concept,
or merely a “supreme oneness” is
a topic hotly debated by planar
scholars. The aeons themselves
are silent, referring to this being or
concept as the Monad, a “condition
of all.” Regardless of what the
Monad actually is, there certainly
exists another category of powerful
aeons-the primal inevitables, each
a unique demigod with its own
powers and goals. Relatively few
primal inevitables remain today,
for nearly three-quarters of their
irreplaceable kind have fallen in the
endless battle with the inexorable
forces of entropy.
A-C
9

8
Melee [one-action] shortsword +9 (agile, finesse, lawful, magical, versatile S), Damage 1d6+1 piercing
plus 1d4 lawful
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 1st command, detect alignment (at will,
chaotic only), mending (×3)
Electrical Burst[two-actions] (divine, electricity, evocation) The arbiter releases an electrical burst
from its body that deals 3d6 electricity damage (DC 17 basic Reflex save). Following
such a burst, the arbiter becomes stunned for 24 hours.
Axiomite
According to the axiomites, their kind rose from the raw mathematical
underpinnings of the universe, manifesting as great builders who created the
ancient, colossal cities of the Outer Planes and gave life to the mechanical
inevitables. According to the aeons, axiomites are part of the Monad, having
both risen from and rebelled against it long ago. Since the Convergence, most
axiomites have recognized this as a fundamental truth, particularly after the aeons
showed the axiomites how the Utopian language has formed as an amalgam of
aeon envisioning and formulaic mathematical
expression. Most axiomites live in the perfect
city of Axis, which they continually act to improve,
thus refining the concept of perfection itself.
A particular axiomite may look like any
humanoid creature, though the particular form it takes
on does not affect its abilities. Beneath this assumed form,
all axiomites are the same-clouds of glowing, crystalline
dust that constantly swirls and congeals into complex
tangles of symbols and equations, evincing their existence
as literal creatures of pure mathematical law.
Axiomites arise from the souls of lawful neutral mortals, particularly those
who were, in life, mathematicians, architects, crafters, or philosophers.
While these souls do not retain any memories of their lives in the transition
into axiomites, their life skills and experiences nevertheless serve a valuable
metaphysical resource during formation.
AXIOMITE CREATURE 8
LN MEDIUM AEON MONITOR
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal, Utopian
Skills Acrobatics +16, Axis Lore +17, Craft +21, Diplomacy +15, Occultism +17,
Religion +17
Str +5, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +5, Wis +5, Cha +3
Items sterling artisan’s tools, +1 striking warhammer
AC 26; Fort +13, Ref +16, Will +18; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 155; Immunities disease, emotion, fear; Weaknesses chaotic 10,
Resistances electricity 10, mental 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] warhammer +20 (lawful, magical, shove), Damage 2d8+11
bludgeoning plus 1d6 lawful
Melee [one-action] fist +17 (agile, lawful, magical), Damage 1d8+5 bludgeoning plus 1d6 lawful
Divine Innate Spells DC 27, attack +17; 5th telekinetic haul; 4th dispel magic, divine
wrath (lawful), lightning bolt (×3); 3rd haste (×3), paralyze; 2nd telekinetic maneuver;
1st true strike (at will); Cantrips (4th) telekinetic projectile
Crystalline Dust Form [one-action] (polymorph) The axiomite shifts between its humanoid form and
that of a cloud of crystalline dust in which strange symbols and equations flash. In this
form it gains a fly Speed of 40 feet and can fit through even tiny apertures, similarly
to gaseous form. It can cast spells, but it can’t make melee or ranged attacks
in this state. It can return to its humanoid form by using this action while in
crystalline dust form.
AXIOMITES IN AXIS
On the planar metropolis of Axis,
an axiomite fills one of three roles:
construction and maintenance of
inevitables, building and repairing
Axis’s buildings, and exploring the
laws and constants that underlie all
of reality.
A-C
11

10
Kolyarut
Kolyarut inevitables are enforcers of bargains and punishers of those who fail
to uphold them. Their humanoid shape, ability to disguise themselves among a
humanoid population, and diplomatic leanings make them the most approachable
inevitables, and thus more likely to ally themselves with others. They are among
the most talkative of all inevitables, naturally possessing a courtly grace and an
encyclopedic knowledge of social customs, which they use to assist their efforts
in gathering information on their targets or issuing challenges in a legal manner.
KOLYARUT CREATURE 12
LN MEDIUM AEON INEVITABLE MONITOR
Perception +23 (+27 to detect lies); darkvision
Languages Celestial, Infernal, Utopian; truespeech
Skills Acrobatics +22, Athletics +27, Axis Lore +22, Diplomacy +20, Deception +20,
Survival +22
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +1, Wis +4, Cha +2
Truespeech A kolyarut can speak with and understand any creature that has a language.
Items +1 striking bastard sword
AC 34; Fort +23, Ref +24, Will +22; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215, regeneration 15 (deactivated by chaotic); Immunities death effects, disease,
emotion, poison, unconscious; Weaknesses chaotic 15
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] bastard sword +26 (lawful, magical, two-hand d12), Damage 2d8+13 slashing
plus 1d6 lawful
Melee [one-action] fist +23 (agile, lawful, magical), Damage 1d10+11 bludgeoning plus 1d6 lawful
Divine Innate Spells DC 32; 8th discern location; 5th command; 4th illusory disguise
(at will), suggestion (×2); 3rd paralyze (×2); 2nd invisibility (self only); 1st command
(at will)
Divine Rituals DC 32; geas
Pleroma
Among the most powerful of all the true aeons, pleromas are a manifestation
of the duality of creation and destruction. Their physical manifestation is
a constant state of flux between these two poles, their forms a shifting
cloak of black where galaxies and other celestial objects flit in and out of
existence, as if depicting the constant life, death, and rebirth of a miniature,
self-contained universe.
Pleromas see the multiverse as both eternal and cyclical, doomed and
malleable, ending only if these cycles ever become unbalanced. They
believe the current Convergence is necessary to obtain this
essential balance, and act to ensure that the grand design of
the Monad is carried out to the smallest detail.
PLEROMA CREATURE 20
LN LARGE AEON MONITOR
Perception +37; darkvision, lifesense 120 feet, true seeing
Languages envisioning
Skills Acrobatics +33, Arcana +38, Deception +34, Diplomacy +34,
Occultism +38, Religion +39, Stealth +35
Str +6, Dex +7, Con +6, Int +8, Wis +9, Cha +6
Envisioning Pleromas care little for communication with other creatures,
but when they do convey information, they do so wordlessly through a
series of psychic projections. This acts as telepathy with a range of 100
feet but is understandable to all creatures regardless of whether they have
a language, though the aeon’s meaning to non-aeons can be vague and is often
mysterious. An aeon can use this ability to communicate flawlessly with any other
aeon on the same plane as itself.
INEVITABLE FATES
The fact that the aeons known
as inevitables seem to be on the
decline is taken by some planar
scholars as metaphysical proof
that entropy is on the rise and the
Great Beyond is past its prime and
on the way to the end of this cycle
of reality.
A-C
11

10
AC 45; Fort +32, Ref +31, Will +37; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 335, regeneration 20 (deactivated by chaotic); Immunities negative, positive;
Weaknesses chaotic 20
Reality Twist [reaction] Trigger The pleroma critically fails the saving throw. Effect The critical
failure becomes a normal failure.
Speed fly 40 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] energy touch (agile, lawful, magical) +36, Damage 5d8+18 positive or negative
damage plus 1d6 lawful
Ranged [one-action] Sphere of Oblivion +37 (magical), Effect see Sphere of Oblivion
Divine Innate Spells DC 47, attack +37; 10th alter reality; 9th banishment, blade barrier,
disjunction, overwhelming presence; 8th disintegrate (×2), unrelenting observation;
7th plane shift, retrocognition; 5th creation (at will); 4th create food (at will), shape
stone (at will); 3rd hypercognition (at will); 2nd detect alignment (at will), shape
wood (at will); 1st create water (at will); Constant (8th) true seeing; (4th) freedom
of movement
Energy Touch A pleroma’s touch deals its choice of positive or negative damage, but
neither energy can be used to heal a creature.
Sphere of Creation[two-actions] (incapacitation, magical) Three
times per day, a pleroma can manifest a 2-footdiameter sphere of white energy that hovers
above its left hand. By using a single action,
which has the concentrate trait, the pleroma can
cause the sphere to fly 10 feet. The sphere can
move in any direction, ignoring difficult terrain,
but it can’t move farther than 300 feet away from
the pleroma. Wherever the sphere travels, it leaves
behind a 5-foot-wide path of new matter, creating either
new terrain (the pleroma’s choice of normal, difficult, or greater
difficult terrain) or a 5-foot-square solid barrier of a single natural
substance (such as clay, wood, or stone). The sphere can enter the
space of a creature; when it does, the creature must succeed at a DC
43 Fortitude save or be absorbed into the sphere. On a successful
save, the creature is pushed to a space of the GM’s choice away
from the sphere. Those who fail take 20d6 positive damage (even
if they are living) and are pushed away as a success. Those who
critically fail, or are reduced to 0 HP by the damage from a failure,
become one with the new material and can be restored only via a
10th-level spell. A pleroma can have only one Sphere of Creation
in existence at a time, and the sphere automatically vanishes in a
flash of blinding light after 1d4 minutes. All creatures within 30
feet of the sphere of creation when it vanishes must succeed at
a DC 43 Fortitude save or be permanently blinded.
Sphere of Oblivion [two-actions] (incapacitation, magical) Three times
per day, a pleroma can manifest a 2-foot-diameter sphere of
complete and utter darkness that hovers above its right
hand. It can move and control the sphere in the same
manner as its Sphere of Creation. The sphere is an
empty void that lasts for 1 minute before collapsing
in on itself and winking out of existence. Once
manifested, the sphere can be used as a ranged
attack, but it blinks out of existence immediately after that attack is resolved. Any
unattended object that touches the void is sucked in and completely destroyed.
Larger objects (such as ships or buildings) are destroyed at a rate of one 10-foot cube
per round of contact. The sphere can enter the space of a creature, with effects similar
to the Sphere of Creation except that it deals negative damage (even to undead) on
a failure and annihilates rather than incorporating the creature into material. Such a
destroyed creature can be restored only by a 10th-level spell.
OTHER AEONS
Aeons are among the least
understood of the Great Beyond’s
immortal creatures, and they
have a wide range of powers
and abilities. Far more aeons
exist than those presented here,
including guardians of time like the
four-armed bythos and the weirdly
symmetrical theletos, which
moderates the duality between
freedom and fate.
A-C
13

12
Alghollthu
In bygone millennia, aquatic monsters known as alghollthus used their occult
powers to conquer and rule vast parts of the world. Their empires contained
countless mortal slaves treated as little more than cattle. Alghollthus shaped their
slaves and other creatures using mental manipulation and physically transformative
magic. Aberrant horrors from faceless stalkers to mimics can be traced back to this
meddling. The rulers of the alghollthu race, the so-called veiled masters, further
shaped entire societies by assuming the forms of those they controlled. From the
heights of power to the shadows of poverty, the veiled masters manipulated these
societies according to their own dark designs, enslaving, killing, or horrifically
transforming those who discovered their plans or acted against them.
In time, the alghollthus grew frustrated with their increasingly upstart slave
societies and sought to wipe the slate clean-both starting anew and punishing
those who had become too willful and rebellious. They used incredible magical
power to call forth a cataclysm, hoping to destroy the rebellious societies they’d
manipulated. Yet they miscalculated the strength of faith and will to survive of
their pawns and slaves, and in time the world and its empires recovered and grew
strong once again-this time without alghollthu influence.
Today, the alghollthus have retreated from their mass-scale manipulation
of the surface world, and they have mostly remained within the deep aquatic
realms where they still rule without question. Yet they have not abandoned their
plots entirely, and the reemergence of servitor races like ugothols points to a
frightening possibility-that the alghollthus have turned their hateful eyes to the
surface once again.
Skum (Ulat-Kini)
The most numerous of the alghollthus are the
ulat-kinis, a servitor race created from human stock
to serve as rank-and-file soldiers in alghollthu armies.
At the zenith of alghollthu power, ulat-kinis formed
massive legions and enjoyed significant power over other species. When the
alghollthus retreated from the world, they abandoned teeming hordes of ulatkinis. Although these erstwhile soldiers tried to continue their conquering
ways, their numbers declined rapidly in battlefield defeats and purposeful
exterminations enacted by their enemies. Ulat-kini society
degenerated, so that now only a few enclaves exist
in the depths of the earth or along isolated
coastlines. Few remember their own species’
name, instead using the epithet their foes
gave them: “skum.”
SKUM CREATURE 2
LE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS HUMANOID
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Alghollthu, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +4, Stealth +7
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +0, Cha –2
Items trident
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 40; Resistances cold 5
Speed 20 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] trident +10, Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+4
slashing
Melee[one-action] fangs +10, Damage 2d4+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] trident +7 (thrown 20 feet),
Damage 1d8+3 piercing
ALGHOLLTHU DOMAINS
The ruling castes of the alghollthu
species dwell in oceanic depths
or underground waterways, while
their servitors like ulat-kinis and
ugothols can often be found in
coastal regions and marshes. 
A-C
13

12
Faceless Stalker (Ugothol)
Among the subtler of the alghollthu creations were the ugothols-also known as
faceless stalkers. These twisted beings used shapeshifting to infiltrate settlements
and assassinate key targets. They sowed discord and replaced leaders, causing
unwanted organizations to implode and bothersome people to lose face and
eventually disappear. Entirely terrestrial in nature, ugothols can easily extend
alghollthu plots above the waves for extended periods of time, giving their
aquatic masters enhanced reach into these unpleasantly dry realms. Today,
most faceless stalkers-like the less dangerous ulat-kinis-pursue programmed
goals without the guidance of alghollthu rule. Faceless stalkers prefer to live
as close to the sea coast as possible, although they are not aquatic creatures
themselves. Most dwell in tiny tribes in marshlands. Others live in the sewers
of coastal towns.
By instinct, faceless stalkers seek to sow discord. They replace leaders in
humanoid societies, then guide infiltrated settlements down paths of destruction.
Among humanoids who have wicked tendencies, a faceless stalker can become
a prominent trailblazer, leading a group to new heights of depravity and
violence. Inevitably, however, faceless stalker infiltrators lead their followers
to ruin. The ugothol eventually moves on-either because its true nature
is about to be discovered, or because it has despoiled or devastated all
local resources.
An ugothol gains nourishment only through its long, bloodsucking
tongue. Their prey bear distinctive triple puncture wounds near major
arteries. Corpses bearing such marks are typically the first clues found
to uncover a faceless stalker’s presence, though sometimes they are
overlooked as marks belonging to a vampire or chupacabra.
FACELESS STALKER CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Alghollthu, Aquan, Common; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +12, Deception +13, Stealth +13,
Thievery +9
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items longsword, studded leather
AC 21; Fort +9, Ref +9, Will +12; +2 status to all saves vs. auditory
and visual
HP 60; Resistances bludgeoning 5
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] longsword +14 (versatile P), Damage 1d8+6 slashing
Melee [one-action] claw +12 (agile), Damage 2d6+6 slashing plus Grab
Occult Innate Spells DC 19; Constant (5th) tongues
Assume Form (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) The
faceless stalker spends 10 minutes reshaping its appearance to
take on the shape of any Small or Medium humanoid. It gains a +4
circumstance bonus to Deception checks to pass as that creature.
Blood Nourishment [one-action] The faceless stalker uses its three-pronged tongue to drink
the blood of an adjacent restrained or unconscious creature. The creature gains
drained 1.
Compression When the faceless stalker successfully Squeezes, it moves through
the tight space at full speed. Narrow confines are not difficult terrain for a
faceless stalker.
Revert Form [free-action] Requirements The faceless stalker is in an assumed form. Effect The
faceless stalker resumes its true form. Until the start of its next turn, it gains a +2
status bonus to attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and skill checks.
Sneak Attack The faceless stalker deals 1d6 extra precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
ANCIENT INFLUENCES
The veiled masters influenced the
ancient Azlanti, and it was they who
invoked the apocalypse of Earthfall
to destroy Azlant when humanity
grew too prideful. That this act also
called down the magical Starstone,
an artifact capable of transforming
mortals into gods, was an ironic
turn of events considering the
alghollthus’ intolerance for faith.
A-C
15

14
Alghollthu Master (Aboleth)
Aboleths form the core of alghollthu society, and while they are the “common folk”
of their own societies, they see themselves as masters of all others. Unlike their
leaders, who mask their actions using magical disguises, aboleths revel in their
monstrous forms, appearing as primeval fish with tentacles. Masters of psychic
manipulation, they are a species so ancient that they were present in the world when
it was young, before the gods had turned their attention to the planet. They see all
other life as something they have the right to control, so the idea that potential
slaves might have faith in a higher power other than themselves enrages aboleths.
ALGHOLLTHU MASTER CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON LE HUGE ABERRATION AQUATIC
Perception +17; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Alghollthu, Aquan, Common, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +16, Deception +15, Intimidation +15, Lore (any one subcategory) +14,
Occultism +16
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +6, Int +3, Wis +5, Cha +4
Mucus Cloud (aura, disease) 5 feet. While underwater, an aboleth exudes a cloud of
transparent slime. An air-breathing creature adjacent to an aboleth must succeed at a
DC 25 Fortitude save each round or lose the ability to breathe air but gain the ability
to breathe water for 3 hours.
AC 23; Fort +15, Ref +10, Will +16
HP 135
Speed 10 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] tentacle +16 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+10 bludgeoning plus slime
Occult Innate Spells DC 25; 7th project image (at will), veil (at will); 6th dominate (×3),
illusory scene (at will); 5th illusory object (at will); 4th hallucinatory terrain (at will);
3rd hypnotic pattern (at will)
Slime (curse, occult, virulent) Saving Throw Fortitude DC 25; Stage 1 no ill effect (1 round);
Stage 2 the victim’s skin softens, inflicting drained 1 (1 round); Stage 3 the victim’s
skin transforms into a clear, slimy membrane, inflicting drained 2 until
the curse ends; every hour this membrane remains dry, the
creature’s drained condition increases by 1 (permanent).
A remove disease spell can counteract this curse, but
immunity to disease offers no protection against it.
Veiled Master (Vidileth)
The powerful vidileths are the insidious
veiled masters of the alghollthus. These
manipulators of mind and body alike
lead their species in the open, using
their ability to change form to walk
among and deceive humans and
other sapient species. Many veiled
masters are even more powerful than
the typical specimen presented here and can
use a wide range of arcane or occult spells and rituals.
While veiled masters command significant
combat prowess and impressive magical skills,
the greatest danger they pose to others is their
uncanny ability to infiltrate into societies much
different than their own. The most paranoid of
adventurers and conspiracy scholars worry that every major city has been
infested by secret cabals of vidileths, while others dismiss this as hogwash
and fearmongering. The truth is likely somewhere in between, but it doesn’t
take many veiled masters pulling the strings behind the scenes to wreak havoc
upon an entire nation!
ALGHOLLTHU TREASURE
Although most alghollthus lack
the greed that tempts most
mortals, they do gather wealth
and magical tools to use in their
schemes. A given aboleth or
veiled master might also wear
magical jewelry and other objects.
Faceless stalkers and other
humanoid servants of alghollthus
use weapons and armor, such as
the faceless stalker’s sword or
ulat-kini’s trident, as well as other
tools. These servitor races can be
as acquisitive as other humanoids.
A-C
15

14
VEILED MASTER CREATURE 14
RARE LE LARGE ABERRATION AQUATIC
Perception +25; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Alghollthu, Aquan, Common, Undercommon; tongues
Skills Arcana +27, Athletics +24, Deception +28, Intimidation +26, Lore (any one
subcategory) +29, Occultism +29, Society +27, Stealth +24
Str +6, Dex +6, Con +8, Int +7, Wis +5, Cha +6
Mucus Cloud (aura, disease) As aboleth, but DC 36, 30-foot radius, and 24 hours.
AC 34; Fort +26, Ref +22, Will +24; +2 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 270; Immunities controlled, electricity, mental; Resistances cold 20
Speed 10 feet, swim 80 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +30 (agile, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+12 slashing plus slime
Melee [one-action] fangs +28 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 3d8+12 piercing
plus slime and consume memories
Melee [one-action] tentacle +28 (agile, electricity, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 7d6 electricity
plus thoughtlance
Occult Innate Spells DC 37; 9th project image (at will); 8th illusory scene (at will), suggestion
(×3); 7th veil (at will); 6th dominate (×3); 5th dimension door (×3), hallucinatory terrain
(at will), illusory object (at will); 3rd hypnotic pattern (at will), levitate (at will), mind
reading (at will), secret page (at will); Constant (5th) tongues
Occult Rituals DC 37; geas (5th)
Change Shape [free-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) Once per round, a veiled
master can take on the appearance of a humanoid of Large, Medium, or Small size or
resume its true form. While in humanoid form, the veiled master’s Speed is 30 feet, and it
loses its mucus cloud aura and swim Speed.
If the humanoid form assumed lacks
the aquatic trait, the veiled master
loses its own aquatic trait as well. In
humanoid form, the veiled master can
use weapons, or it can make Strikes
that work like its tentacle attack but
use the reach of its current form. If
the assumed form has fangs or claws,
the veiled master can also make such
Strikes, but these attacks lack the veiled master’s slime.
Consume Memories (mental, occult) When a veiled
master makes a fangs Strike against a creature,
it can consume some of that creature’s memories. The target must succeed at a
DC 37 Fortitude saving throw or become stupefied 1. A veiled master regains 5
Hit Points each time it successfully consumes memories. When
a veiled master consumes memories, it learns some of the
creature’s memories (subject to the GM’s discretion).
Delayed Suggestion (enchantment, occult) When a veiled master
successfully casts dominate on a creature, a suggestion
spell triggers when the dominate spell ends. This suggestion
usually causes the target to return to the veiled master, so
the creature can cast dominate again, but a veiled master can
set the suggestion to different orders if it wishes.
Slime (curse, occult, virulent) As alghollthu master, but DC 36.
Tentacle Flurry[two-actions] The veiled master thrashes about with its tentacles. Make
a tentacle Strike against each creature within its reach. Roll only one attack
roll, and roll the damage only once for all targets.
Thoughtlance (curse, enchantment, occult) A creature touched by the
veiled master’s tentacles, whether those tentacles deal damage or not,
must attempt a DC 34 Will save, becoming slowed 1 on a failure or
slowed 2 on a critical failure. Each time the affected creature ends its
turn, its slowed value decreases by 1.
OTHER ALGHOLLTHUS
While the veiled masters are the
rulers of alghollthu society, they are
not the most powerful of their kind.
Greater, more mysterious creatures
that function as organic thought
networks, immense aquatic engines
of war, or specialized extractors
of forgotten secrets dwell among
their sunken cities. Meanwhile,
the world above remains infested
with creatures that were originally
created by the alghollthus but have
long since drifted away from their
aquatic progenitors to become their
own sinister monstrosities.
A-C
17

16
Angel
The celestial hosts of angels are messengers and warriors, divided into choirs
based on their abilities and purviews. The majority of angels are neutral good and
live in Nirvana, the plane of virtue and enlightenment. However, some angels,
including several angelic deities, have different alignments, and some even dwell
on other planes. Regardless of alignment, angels remain benevolent messengers
possessed with magical auras to aid their allies.
Cassisian (Archive Angel)
The weakest of angels, cassisians usually serve as lackey messengers for more
powerful angels or as spiritual guides for mortals. Despite their limited intellect,
cassisians have a knack for precise recollection, particularly with scripture. Most
cassisians are formed from the souls of trustworthy mortals, but some arise from
fragments of greater angels destroyed in service to the celestial realms.
CASSISIAN CREATURE 1
NG TINY ANGEL CELESTIAL
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +6, Diplomacy +6, Religion +6, Stealth +6
Str –1, Dex +1, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 18; +1 status vs. evil creatures; Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +4; +1
status to all saves vs. evil creatures
HP 20; Weaknesses evil 3; Resistances cold 3, fire 3
Transfer Protection A non-evil creature can wear a
willing cassisian as a helmet. While it does, the cassisian
can take no actions, but the cassisian extends its +1
status bonus to AC and saves against evil creatures to its
wearer. At any time, the cassisian can detach itself from
its wearer as an action.
Speed fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] headbutt +6 (agile, finesse, good, magical),
Damage 1d6–1 bludgeoning plus 1d4 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 16; 4th read omens; 1st detect alignment
(at will, evil only), heal; Cantrips (1st) know direction, light
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
A cassisian can take the appearance of a dove, a winged humanoid,
a dog, or a fish. Normally, this doesn’t change its Speed or the attack
and damage bonuses for its Strikes, but it might change the damage
type Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning). Any further changes for
specific forms are noted below.
• Dog size Small; scent (imprecise) 30 feet, Speed 40 feet; Melee jaws +7,
Damage 1d6+2 piercing plus Knockdown
• Fish swim Speed 30 feet
Eye Beams [two-actions] (concentrate, divine, evocation) The cassisian releases beams of heat
or cold from its eyes, dealing 2d6 cold or fire damage (DC 17 basic Reflex save) to all
creatures in a 15-foot line. It can’t use Eye Beams again for 1d4 rounds.
Repository of Lore While the cassisian isn’t particularly intelligent, it has perfect memory
and can remember everything it sees or hears. This allows it to attempt Lore checks
on any topic, provided (at the GM’s discretion) the cassisian has encountered the topic
in question before. The cassisian’s limited intellect often prevents it from acting upon
its knowledge, making it a better resource than agent in matters of information use.
Choral (Choir Angel)
Choral angels are incredible singers who fill the halls of Nirvana with pious
chants and sacred hymns. They form from the souls of talented bards and other
performers. While they shy away from conflict, they occasionally brave the mortal
ANGELIC DIVINITIES
The most powerful angels belong
to a category of demigods known
as the empyreal lords-a title
shared with other powerful
good-aligned demigods among
the host of archons, azatas, and
other inhabitants of the celestial
planes. The most powerful and
most well-known of the angelic
empyreal lords is Sarenrae.
A-C
17

16
realm to deliver good omens and auspicious messages. Choral angels often serve
the goddess Shelyn, but they can also serve other good deities and empyreal lords.
CHORAL CREATURE 6
NG SMALL ANGEL CELESTIAL
Perception +14; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +12, Diplomacy +15, Performance +17, Religion +14
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +5
AC 24; Fort +10, Ref +14, Will +16; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 100; Weaknesses evil 5; Resistances sonic 5
Harmonizing Aura (aura, divine, evocation, sonic) 20 feet. Allies in the area gain a +2 status
bonus to sonic damage rolls and a +1 status bonus to AC and all saves against sonic
and auditory effects. Enemies in the area take a –2 status
penalty to sonic damage rolls and a –1 status penalty to
AC and all saves against sonic and auditory effects.
Speed 30 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +14 (agile, finesse, good, magical), Damage
3d6+1 bludgeoning plus 1d6 good
Ranged [one-action] piercing hymn +17 (good, magical, range 90
feet, sonic), Damage 4d6 sonic damage plus 1d6 good
and deafening aria
Divine Innate Spells DC 23, attack +13; 3rd heal, remove
curse, remove disease, remove fear (at will), sound burst;
2nd invisibility (at will, self only), sound burst (at will); 1st
counter performance (at will; Core Rulebook 386); Cantrips (3rd)
ghost sound, inspire competence (Core Rulebook 386), inspire courage
(Core Rulebook 386); Constant (5th) tongues
Divine Rituals DC 23; angelic messenger
Deafening Aria On a critical hit with
piercing hymn, the target is
deafened for 1 minute.
Harmonize [one-action] The choral angel adds
its harmony to a choral angel ally
within its harmonizing aura. The ally
can cast calm emotions or heroism on
its next turn in place of its 3rd-level
sound burst or heighten its 3rd-level sound burst
by 1 level. If five different choral angels use
Harmonize on the same choral angel ally, it
can instead cast divine decree in place of
its 3rd-level sound burst.
Balisse (Confessor Angel)
Balisses, or confessor angels, seek to assist
mortals ensnared by moral dilemmas or
crises of faith. Balisses prefer to guide people
to their own decisions rather than demand
obedience to a higher cause, as intrinsic belief
is even more powerful than blind obedience.
While most balisses are fundamentally honest,
they use their guardian angel ability to seem less
intimidating and decrease the chance the mortal
will simply acquiesce to the opinion of an obviously
divine being. Balisses often form from souls of those who
performed evil acts but were redeemed. Many serve the goddess Sarenrae, but
they can serve other good deities and empyreal lords as well.
ANGELIC LOCATIONS
Angels normally live on Nirvana
or other celestial planes, but their
missions can bring them to the
Material Plane. Spellcasters can
conjure them for aid or advice
in times of need, and they can
even be found, if rarely, crusading
against fiends in Hell, the Abyss,
or anywhere in between.
A-C
19

18
BALISSE CREATURE 8
NG MEDIUM ANGEL CELESTIAL
Perception +18 (+20 to detect lies and illusions); darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +14, Diplomacy +17, Religion +18
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +6, Cha +5
Items +1 striking scimitar
AC 26; Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +18; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 145; Weaknesses evil 10; Resistances fire 15
Confessor’s Aura (aura, divine, enchantment, mental) 20 feet. Creatures in the balisse’s
aura are subject to zone of truth (DC 23). Additionally, if these creatures choose to
honestly express their own conflicted feelings, the aura makes it easier for them to
put words to those feelings.
Speed 30 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] flaming scimitar +20 (fire, forceful, good, magical, sweep), Damage 2d6+8
slashing plus 1d6 fire and 1d6 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 4th divine wrath, heal, paralyze,
remove curse, remove disease; 3rd remove fear (at will) 2nd
invisibility (at will, self only) 1st detect alignment (at will,
evil only)
Divine Rituals DC 26; angelic messenger, atone, geas
Brand of the Impenitent [two-actions] (curse, divine, evocation)
Frequency once per day; Effect The balisse marks
an evil creature within its confessor’s aura as
irredeemable. It can only do so after a failed
attempt to convince the creature to repent. The
touched creature takes a –1 status penalty to AC
and saves, reduces its resistances by 2, and gains
weakness 2 to good damage. The duration depends on
the target’s DC 26 Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The duration is 1 round.
Failure The duration is 1 day.
Critical Failure The duration is permanent.
Flaming Armament (divine, evocation) Any
weapon gains the effect of a flaming property
rune while a balisse wields it.
Guiding Angel [one-action] (divine, transmutation)
While invisible, a balisse can spiritually
attach itself to a non-evil mortal. When it
does so, it merges with the mortal’s body and
is unable to use any of its spells and abilities
other than to interact with the mortal. It must
use Guiding Angel again to leave the mortal. While
merged with the mortal, the balisse can take a form
of its choice that only the mortal can see, such as a
small angel on the mortal’s shoulder. Alternatively, it
can communicate with the mortal using a bodiless
voice only the mortal can hear.
Astral Deva (Emissary Angel)
Astral devas are the elite messengers and
emissaries of the celestial realms, serving
deities and celestial armies by delivering messages,
performing reconnaissance, and providing support for
those in need of aid. They watch over planar
travelers and take powerful mortals under
ANGELIC TREASURE
Many angels wear exquisite
armor or wield beautiful and often
magical weapons. While they are
not hampered by mortal sins like
greed or pride (save for the very
rare and tragic exception), they do
enjoy the beauty of fine clothing,
exquisite jewelry, and works of art. 
A-C
19

18
their wings to mentor them. Astral devas carry scrolls containing important
messages and other celestial secrets.
Astral devas can form spontaneously from the souls of exceptional
good-aligned mortals, but are also sometimes created from such souls
intentionally by deities or demigods. In the later cases, astral devas often bear
physical features that mark them as closely affiliated with that deity. An astral
deva created by Sarenrae, for example, might have hair made of fire, while one
created by Torag might look more dwarven, and one created by Desna could
have butterfly wings instead of feathered wings. It’s not unusual for astral devas
created by lawful good or chaotic good deities to share their creators’ alignment.
ASTRAL DEVA CREATURE 14
NG MEDIUM ANGEL CELESTIAL
Perception +26; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +24, Diplomacy +26, Intimidation +28,
Religion +24
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +6
Items +2 striking warhammer
AC 36; Fort +27, Ref +26, Will +22; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 285; Weaknesses evil 15
Traveler’s Aura (abjuration, aura, divine) 20 feet. Creatures in the
astral deva’s aura are protected from ambient environmental
damage from any plane, including severe and extreme heat and
cold as well as more exotic dangers. The astral deva
is never flat-footed to creatures within its aura.
Messenger’s Amnesty (abjuration, divine) An astral
deva with a message to deliver is continually
protected by the effect of sanctuary (DC 32).
If the deva breaks the sanctuary, the effect
returns if the deva ceases hostility for
10 minutes.
Speed 40 feet, fly 75 feet
Melee [one-action] holy warhammer +30 (good,
magical, shove), Damage 2d8+22
bludgeoning plus 1d6 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 36, attack +28;
7th blade barrier, divine decree,
divine wrath, heal, remove curse,
remove disease, remove fear;
4th discern lies (at will); 2nd
invisibility (at will, self only);
1st detect alignment (at will,
evil only); Cantrips (7th) light;
Constant (5th) tongues
Divine Rituals DC 36; angelic
messenger
Divine Armament (divine,
evocation) Any weapon
gains the effect of a
holy property rune
while an astral deva
wields it.
Stunning Strike [one-action] Requirements The astral deva hit a foe earlier this turn with a weapon
Strike. Effect The astral deva makes a weapon Strike against the foe. On a success, the
foe must succeed at a DC 34 Fortitude save or become stunned 1. On a critical failure,
the foe is stunned 2 instead.
OTHER ANGELS
The most powerful angels
are known as the solars, but
numerous others can be found
in Nirvana working their own
missions or goals. Angels
generally appear as beautiful,
often somewhat androgynous
humanoids, and the most powerful
often possess two or even four
sets of feathered wings.
A-C
21

20
Animated Object
Granted a semblance of life through the use of rituals or other strange magic,
animated objects take many forms and serve a variety of uses. A few examples
of typical animated objects are listed below. Many of these creatures serve as
guardians, surprising unsuspecting adventurers when they suddenly attack.
Others serve as idle distractions for the exceptionally rich, simple servants
created to handle odd jobs, and the like.
Animated Broom
Animated brooms perform menial tasks of cleaning and upkeep, but they can
step in to defend a room from intrusion if needed. These simple animated
objects can be found with greater frequency than more complicated and
costly objects.
ANIMATED BROOM CREATURE –1
N SMALL CONSTRUCT MINDLESS
Perception +3; darkvision
Skills Athletics +5
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +0, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 16 (14 when broken); construct armor; Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +3
HP 6; Hardness 2; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious
Construct Armor Like normal objects, an animated broom has Hardness. This Hardness
reduces any damage it takes by an amount equal to the Hardness. Once an animated
broom is reduced to less than half its Hit Points, or immediately upon being damaged
by a critical hit, its construct armor breaks and its Armor Class is reduced to 14.
Speed 15 feet
Melee [one-action] bristles +6 (agile, magical, finesse), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning plus dust
Dust A creature hit by an animated broom’s bristles must succeed at a DC 15 Fortitude
save or spend its next action coughing. Even if hit by multiple dust attacks, the
creature has to spend only 1 action coughing to clear the dust out. A creature that
doesn’t breathe is immune to this effect.
Animated Armor
Suits of animated armor see use both as guardians and as training partners in
high-end martial academies able to afford the extravagance. They are most often
found in wizard laboratories and ancient dungeons.
ANIMATED ARMOR CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM CONSTRUCT MINDLESS
Perception +6; darkvision
Skills Athletics +9
Str +3, Dex –3, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 17 (13 when broken); construct armor; Fort +10, Ref +3, Will +4
HP 20; Hardness 9; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed,
drained, fatigued, healing, mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks,
paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious
Construct Armor As animated broom, but reduced to AC 13 when broken.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] glaive +11 (deadly 1d8, forceful, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage
1d8+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] gauntlet +9 (agile, free-hand, magical), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Animated Statue
Animated statues are often used to guard crypts, small shrines, or areas in
government buildings where they can be positioned amid normal statues to
hide their true nature until an intruder arouses their ire. Adventurers’ suspicions
ANIMATING OBJECTS
Most animated objects
encountered by adventurers are
permanently animated creatures,
either created by rituals or given
life by infusions of positive energy.
Restless spirits, certain ghosts, and
other haunting undead influences
can also give rise to animated
objects, although in cases like
the poltergeist (page 264), what
appears to be an animated object
may merely be an evil force using
its magic to hurl furnishings about
as weapons.
A-C
21

20
regarding statues suddenly animating and attacking has led many less scrupulous
adventurers to automatically attack any statues they encounter, ruining harmless,
ancient relics.
ANIMATED STATUE CREATURE 3
N MEDIUM CONSTRUCT EARTH MINDLESS
Perception +9; darkvision
Skills Athletics +11
Str +4, Dex –2, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 19 (15 when broken); construct armor; Fort +12, Ref +5, Will +5
HP 35; Hardness 6; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious
Construct Armor As animated broom, but reduced to AC 15 when broken.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +11 (magical), Damage 1d8+6 bludgeoning plus Grab
Giant Animated Statue
As with any humanoid animated statues of Medium size, giant animated statues
are used to guard locations of importance, but their increased size and power
make them most useful in large vaults, spacious chambers, or outdoor locations.
Animated objects of this strength and size are ideal for tasks and responsibilities
usually performed by golems, and more powerful animated objects are thus all
but unheard of.
GIANT ANIMATED STATUE CREATURE 7
N HUGE CONSTRUCT EARTH MINDLESS
Perception +13; darkvision
Skills Athletics +17
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +6, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 26 (22 when broken); construct armor; Fort +17,
Ref +10, Will +9
HP 100; Hardness 10; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed,
drained, fatigued, healing, mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks,
paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious
Construct Armor As animated broom, but reduced to AC 22 when broken.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] stone fist +19 (magical), Damage 2d12+6 bludgeoning plus Grab
Ranged [one-action] flaming coal +12 (fire, magical, range increment 80 feet), Damage 2d6+6
bludgeoning and 2d8 fire
Brazier The statue carries a wide brazier full of hot coals. To make flaming coal Strikes
or use Burn Alive, the statue must have the brazier held in one hand or otherwise
have it within reach. Instead of targeting the statue with an attack, a creature can
target the brazier directly. The brazier has the same AC and saves as the statue.
Dealing 15 cold damage to the brazier
or dousing it with at least 2 gallons of
water extinguishes the coals. This
prevents the statue from using
Burn Alive and causes its
ranged attacks to no longer
deal 2d8 fire damage.
Burn Alive [one-action] (fire) The
statue grinds a creature it
has grabbed into the redhot coals of its brazier.
The target takes 3d8 fire
damage and 1d8 persistent
fire damage.
GUARDED TREASURES
Animated objects are mindless
constructs. While this leaves
them no concept of the value
of treasure, they are often
used as guardians for vaults or
repositories of valuables. In these
cases, the treasures they guard
can vary wildly, but should be of a
value appropriate for the animated
object’s level.
A-C
23

22
Ankhrav
Ankhravs are immense, burrowing, and insectile predators, considered by
inhabitants of the rural areas of the world to be an all-too-common plague.
Ankhrav
These horse-sized, burrowing monsters generally avoid heavily settled areas like
cities, but ankhravs’ predilection for livestock and humanoid flesh ensures that
the creatures do not remain in the deep wilderness for long. Desperate farmers
whose fields become infested by ankhravs often have little recourse but to seek
the aid of adventurers.
ANKHRAV CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +7; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +11, Stealth +8
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +0, Cha –2
AC 20; Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +7
HP 40
Speed 25 feet, burrow 20 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +13 (acid), Damage 1d8+4 piercing plus 1d6 acid
Ranged [one-action] acid spit +10 (acid, range 30 feet), Damage 3d6 acid
Armor-Rending Bite [two-actions] The ankhrav makes a mandibles Strike; if the Strike hits, the
target’s armor takes the damage and the acid damage bypasses the armor’s Hardness.
Spray Acid [two-actions] (acid) Frequency once per hour; Effect The ankhrav spews acid in a
30-foot cone, dealing 3d6 acid damage and 1d6 persistent acid damage (DC 20 basic
Reflex save).
Hive Mother
Ankhrav hive mothers are fearsome predators that one can easily distinguish
from the typical ankhrav not only by their greater size, but the presence of a
large pair of razor-sharp, mantis-like arms.
HIVE MOTHER CREATURE 8
UNCOMMON N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +16; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 90 feet
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +20, Stealth +11, Survival +16
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 29; Fort +18, Ref +15, Will +14
HP 120
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet, burrow 20 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +20 (acid), Damage 2d8+6 piercing plus 2d6 acid
Ranged [one-action] acid spit +17 (acid, range 30 feet), Damage 5d6 acid
Armor-Rending Bite [two-actions] The hive mother makes a
mandibles Strike; if the Strike hits, the target’s armor
takes the damage and the acid damage bypasses the
armor’s Hardness.
Frenzy Pheromone [two-actions] The hive mother unleashes a
pheromone that causes all other ankhravs within a 100-foot
emanation to become quickened 1 until the start of the hive
mother’s next turn, and they can use the extra action only
for Burrow, Stride, or Strike actions. The hive mother
can’t unleash the pheromone again for 1d4 rounds.
Spray Acid [two-actions] (acid) The hive mother spews acid
in a 60-foot cone, dealing 8d6 acid damage and 1d6
persistent acid damage (DC 26 basic Reflex save). It
can’t spew acid again for 1d4 rounds.
ANKHRAV BURROWS
As if the appearance of a hungry
ankhrav in a stretch of farmland
isn’t bad enough, it almost always
indicates the proximity of an
ankhrav hive nearby. A disturbing
number of ankhravs can infest
a lair. However, adventurers
brave enough to crawl through
the tangled burrows are often
rewarded with large amounts of
treasure as ankhravs have a habit
of dragging their victims back
to the deepest corners of their
den to feast, usually discarding
the remains with most of the
gear intact. 
A-C
23

22
Ape
While many apes exhibit peaceful or reclusive behavior, gorillas can be territorial,
and the megaprimatus is especially aggressive and dangerous.
Gorilla
Gorillas can be territorial creatures, particularly if provoked by hunters or the
presence of more dangerous monsters. A gorilla uses its fangs and powerful arms
to bite and pummel trespassers with wild abandon.
GORILLA CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +8; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +11, Stealth +7
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +12, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 45
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +11 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+4 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] jaws +11 (reach 5 feet), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Frightening Display [two-actions] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental) The
gorilla beats its chest in a terrifying display. Creatures within
30 feet must attempt a DC 20 Will save. While a creature is
frightened by this ability, it is flat-footed to the gorilla.
Critical Success No effect and temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is frightened 1.
Critical Failure The creature is frightened 2.
Megaprimatus
The megaprimatus is among the mightiest of apes,
quick to confront any perceived intrusions into its
domain. With a height of 40 feet, it towers over even
most giants, and is used to being the top-tier predator
in the region.
MEGAPRIMATUS CREATURE 8
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +15; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +19
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +2
AC 26; Fort +19, Ref +16, Will +13
HP 150
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +21 (agile, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d8+10 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+10 piercing
Mangling Rend [two-actions] A megaprimatus makes two fist Strikes against the
same target. If both hit, the attack deals an additional 2d6 bludgeoning
damage, the target is flat-footed, and the target takes a –20-foot status
penalty to all Speeds until the end of its next turn.
Terrifying Display [two-actions] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental) The megaprimatus
beats its chest in a terrifying display. Creatures within 50 feet must attempt
a DC 27 Will save. While a creature is frightened by this ability, it is flat-footed to
the megaprimatus and to gorillas.
Critical Success No effect and temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is frightened 1.
Critical Failure The creature is frightened 2 and fleeing until the end of its next turn.
GIGANTOPITHECUS
These fierce kin of orangutans are
three times heavier than a gorilla.
They are level 4, with statistics
roughly akin to an elite gorilla.
A-C
25

24
Arboreal
Arboreals are guardians of the forest and representatives of the trees. As longlived as the woods they watch over, arboreals consider themselves parents and
shepherds of trees rather than their gardeners. Consequently, while arboreals
tend to be slow and methodical, they are terrifyingly swift when forced to fight
in defense of the woods. Though they rarely seek out the companionship of
short-lived folk-even elves are fugacious in the eyes of arboreals-and have
an inherent distrust of change, arboreals have been known to tolerate those
who seek to learn from their long-winded, rambling monologues, especially
if such pupils also express a desire to protect the timberlands. Against those
who threaten their realm, such as loggers eager to harvest lumber or settlers
aiming to establish croplands or a town, arboreals’ wrath is unwavering and
devastating. Perhaps ironically, arboreals are gifted at tearing down what others
build-a trait that serves vengeful members of their kind well.
Arboreal Warden
Arboreal wardens are the rangers of arboreal society. These itinerant
folk have an innate curiosity about the woodlands in which they
dwell, and rarely stop to take root and rest in the same part of
the forest twice. This wanderlust makes wardens ideal forest
patrollers and scouts. While they are robust combatants, they
know better than to confront dangerous foes on their
own. Instead, they report any dangers to arboreal
regents. In rare cases, large groups of arboreal
wardens congregate to form a copse. Copses travel
beyond the boundaries of a forest to investigate the
hinterlands and gather intelligence on potential threats
before returning to report their findings. Arboreal
wardens do not pretend to understand to other
creatures’ motives-like most forces of the natural
world, they are ambivalent about mortal affairs that do
not involve their forest.
ARBOREAL WARDEN CREATURE 4
NG LARGE PLANT
Perception +11; low-light vision
Languages Arboreal, Common, Sylvan
Skills Athletics +13, Stealth +9 (+14 in forests)
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items large bark shield (Hardness  3, Hit Points 20,
BT 10), stone longsword
AC 20 (22 with shield raised); Fort +13, Ref +9,
Will +11
HP 75; Weaknesses axe vulnerability, fire 10;
Resistances bludgeoning 5, piercing 5
Axe Vulnerability An arboreal warden takes 5 additional
damage from axes.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] stone longsword +13 (reach 10 feet),
Damage 1d8+10 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] shield bash +13, Damage 1d6+10
bludgeoning
Shield Push [two-actions] The arboreal warden Strides
and then makes a shield bash Strike. If the
attack hits, the target is pushed 10 feet.
FELLED ARBOREALS
Arboreals have a great respect for
dead members of their species. Their
elaborate burial rituals involve laying
the fallen arboreal down in a mossy
bed in the center of a grove of
saplings. The decomposing arboreal
nourishes the saplings, ensuring the
growth of a new generation of trees.
A-C
25

24
Awakened Tree
Arboreal regents and other wielders of powerful primal magic grant temporary
sentience to trees in order to protect the forest. Invested with a workable set of
instincts and the ability to mobilize and attack, these awakened trees follow the
commands of their master and fight to protect their home. The statistics below
work just as well for foliage that has become animate via other methods, such as a
mystical influence from another dimension, a capricious fey spirit, or the like.
AWAKENED TREE CREATURE 6
N HUGE PLANT
Perception +13; low-light vision
Languages Arboreal (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +14, Stealth +9 (+14 in forests)
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +6, Int –5, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 22; Fort +16, Ref +9, Will +13
HP 100; Weaknesses axe vulnerability, fire 10; Resistances bludgeoning 5, piercing 5
Axe Vulnerability An awakened tree takes 5 additional damage from axes.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] branch +16 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+6 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] root +16 (trip), Damage 2d6+6 bludgeoning
Arboreal Regent
Arboreal regents-also called treants-are lumbering, solitary creatures
responsible for guarding an entire forest. They take an especially long view
of affairs and never act brashly or without much deliberation. They
occasionally come together in small groups called groves to share
news and pass their wisdom down to the arboreal wardens that have
sprouted under their watch. In times of grave danger, all the groves in a
region may gather for a great months-long meeting to plan and, eventually,
act upon a threat.
The typical arboreal regent is 30 feet tall, has a trunk 2 feet in diameter, and
weighs 4,500 pounds.
ARBOREAL REGENT CREATURE 8
NG HUGE PLANT
Perception +18; low-light vision
Languages Arboreal, Common, Sylvan; speak with plants
Skills Athletics +19, Diplomacy +16, Intimidation +16, Nature +18, Stealth +11 (+21
in forests)
Str +7, Dex –1, Con +6, Int +1, Wis +4, Cha +2
AC 26; Fort +20, Ref +11, Will +16
HP 150; Weaknesses axe vulnerability, fire 10; Resistances bludgeoning 5,
piercing 5
Axe Vulnerability The arboreal regent takes 5 additional damage from axes.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] branch +19 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+7 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] root +19 (trip), Damage 2d8+7 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +19 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 2d10+7 bludgeoning
Primal Innate Spells DC 26; Constant speak with plants
Awaken Tree [two-actions](concentrate, primal) The arboreal regent causes a tree within 180
feet to uproot itself and fight as a minion using the statistics for an awakened tree.
The arboreal regent can control up to two awakened trees at a time, and it can
issue commands to both trees as a single action, which has the concentrate and
auditory traits.
Sunder Objects When an arboreal regent damages an item or structure, it
deals an additional 2d10 damage to that item or structure.
Throw Rock [one-action]
FUNGUS NETWORKS
Particularly old arboreal regents
and other powerful arboreals can
tap into the extensive network of
fungus that connects the roots
of all the trees in the forest. By
doing so, the arboreal can learn
of threats throughout the entire
woodland, even from miles away.
A-C
27

26
ARCHON DIVINITIES
As with angels and azatas, the
most powerful of archons are
a caste of demigods known
collectively as empyreal lords.
Each archon empyreal lord is a
unique and powerful creature
that keeps a domain somewhere
in Heaven and is worshipped on
Material Plane worlds. Archon
divinities serve a variety of goals
and focus on different aspects
of righteousness. Some, such as
Zohls, hold influence over the
pursuit of truth and determined
investigations, while others,
like Damerrich, the demigod
of executions, emphasize the
punishment of unrepentant
wrongdoers and seek to obliterate
evil in all its forms.
Archon
Archons are guardians of Heaven and enemies of chaos and evil. They openly
fight back the spread of fiends but also quietly nurture the seeds of virtue within
mortals, teaching the denizens of the Material Plane how to act with honor and
integrity, enact just laws, and cast off sin and temptation.
Archons live in the immense seven-tiered mountain of Heaven. They manifest
in the Garden at the mountain’s peak from mortal souls who answer a mysterious
voice. There they swear to forever serve the cause of justice and transform into their
new archon forms. Intensely orderly in their metamorphosis, new archons begin
as lantern archons or other lesser forms, transforming into ever-greater archons
as their virtue and achievements grow. Each archon represents a particular virtue,
such as hope, charity, justice, or courage, and they gain strength in the presence of
mortals who exemplify this virtue. Due to their extremely lawful nature, archons
sometimes find themselves at odds with azatas.
Lantern Archon
Friendly, curious, and eternally optimistic, lantern archons embody the virtue of
hope. They are formed of living light given corporeal shape, and they serve as
beacons, guiding mortals out of their darkest moments and toward the path of
righteousness. Their luminous bodies can flicker with the subtlety of a candle
flame or flare up like a torch. Lantern archons can control all aspects of their light
as easily as other creatures control their facial expressions, leading them to change
color, twinkle, and otherwise dim and brighten in time
with their actions and words. While effervescent
and chipper in conversation, lantern archons are
impressively stoic mobile support troops and
guardians in times of conflict, and are capable
of uniting to form powerful warriors of light
called gestalts.
LANTERN ARCHON CREATURE 1
LG SMALL ARCHON CELESTIAL
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +8, Diplomacy +6, Religion +6
Str –5, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 16; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +4
HP 20; Weaknesses evil 3; Resistances fire 3
Retributive Strike [reaction] A lantern archon can also
make a Retributive Strike with its light ray.
Speed fly 40 feet
Ranged [one-action] light ray +8 (agile, good, fire, magical,
range 30 feet), Damage 1d4 fire plus 1d4 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 1st detect
alignment (at will; evil only), heal; Cantrips (1st) light
Gestalt [three-actions] (concentrate, divine, transmutation) Nine lantern
archons can use this activity, all within 1 round of the first, to merge together to form
a composite being for 7 rounds that appears as a glowing warrior of light. The gestalt
has the base statistics of a legion archon (AC, saving throws, attacks, skills, Speeds,
and so on) but the spells and special abilities of a lantern archon. Additionally, it has
a ranged light ray Strike (+18 attack, Damage 3d4 fire and 3d4 good), and the bonus
from its Lantern of Hope increases to +3. When the gestalt separates, its remaining
Hit Points are divided evenly among the lantern archons, and if the gestalt had fewer
than 9 HP, some of the lantern archons die.
Lantern of Hope [one-action] (concentrate, divine, enchantment, mental) The lantern archon
shines as a beacon of hope. Good allies within 30 feet gain a +1 status bonus to
damage rolls and to saving throws against crushing despair. 
A-C
27

26
ARCHON LOCATIONS
While commonly found in Heaven,
archons can also be encountered
on the fiendish planes in their
endless crusade against evil. On
the Material Plane they are usually
encountered as advisors or saviors
to those in need.
Horned Archon
Horned archons are secretive and tireless sentinels and scouts, patrolling the Outer
Sphere’s untamed wilds for evil to eliminate and keeping small communities safe from
demons, devils, and worse. They resemble muscular humans with the head, horns,
and legs of a stag. When requested to do so by their patrons, especially Erastil, they
journey to the Material Plane and patrol dangerous frontier areas, secretly performing
acts of kindness such as leading hunters to food, helping lost children, and driving off
evil creatures. Because they roam the wilds of Nirvana and Elysium, horned archons
are among the best at understanding the perspectives of other celestials.
HORNED ARCHON CREATURE 4
LG MEDIUM ARCHON CELESTIAL
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +12, Nature +11, Religion +9, Stealth +10, Survival +11 (+15 to Track)
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items composite longbow (20 arrows)
AC 22; Fort +11, Ref +10, Will +11; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 65; Weaknesses evil 5
Menacing Guardian (aura, divine, enchantment) 30 feet. Enemies that start their
turn in the area or enter it must attempt a DC 19 Will save. On a failure, they
take a –1 status penalty to attack rolls, spell rolls, and damage rolls against
any other target while in the aura for 24 hours or until they damage the archon,
whichever comes first. On a critical failure, they can’t use hostile actions
against any other target while in the area for 24 hours or until they
damage the archon, whichever comes first. Regardless of the
result, a creature is then temporarily immune to further
menacing guardian auras for 24 hours.
Retributive Strike [reaction] A horned archon can also make a
Retributive Strike with its composite longbow.
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] horn +11 (magical), Damage 2d8+3
piercing plus 1d6 good and Push
Ranged [one-action] composite longbow +14 (deadly
1d10, magical, range increment
100 feet, reload 0, volley), Damage
1d8+4 piercing plus 1d6 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 21; 4th, dimension door
(×3); 2nd animal messenger (×3); 1st charm
(animals only; ×3), true strike (×3); Cantrips
(2nd) dancing lights; Constant (5th) tongues
Archon’s Door Once per day, if an archon sees another
creature cast dimension door, it can cast an innate
dimension door (heightened to 5th level) within 1 round
to attempt to follow that creature to the maximum distance
of the archon’s dimension door. If the archon’s dimension
door has enough distance, the archon appears the same
distance and direction from the creature as before
either used dimension door.
Touch of Charity [one-action] (healing, manipulate,
necromancy) A horned archon can touch
another creature to take on that creature’s
wounds, transferring up to 30 of the
horned archon’s HP to the touched
creature. The horned archon
can’t transfer more HP than it
currently has.
A-C
29

28
Legion Archon
Despite their flaming blades and heavy armor, legion archons are the diplomats of
peace among the archons, preferring justice via compromise and mutual benefit
rather than justice by the sword. Nonetheless, when forced to fight against fiendish
powers-especially fiends that embody the sin of wrath-legion archons don’t
hesitate in battle, mounting offensives under divine commanders like Iomedae.
LEGION ARCHON CREATURE 7
LG MEDIUM ARCHON CELESTIAL
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +14, Diplomacy +16, Intimidation +16, Religion +13,
Survival +14
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +5
Items full plate
AC 27; Fort +17, Ref +11, Will +15; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 100; Weaknesses evil 10; Resistances fire 15
Menacing Guardian (aura, divine, enchantment) As horned archon, but DC 23.
Retributive Strike [reaction] A legion archon can also make a Retributive Strike by throwing
its flame of justice.
Speed 30 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] flame of justice +18 (magical, versatile P), Damage
2d10+5 slashing plus 1d6 fire and 1d6 good
Ranged [one-action] flame of justice +15 (magical, range
increment 30 feet, versatile P), Damage 2d10+5
slashing plus 1d6 fire and 1d6 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 24; 4th dimension door (at
will); 1st true strike (×3); Cantrips (4th) light,
message; Constant (5th) tongues
Archon’s Door As horned archon.
Flame of Justice (divine, evocation)
A legion archon’s spirit of
righteousness manifests in its
hands as a mighty two-handed
sword called the flame
ARCHON AESTHETICS
While archons do not seek to
gather or maintain wealth, they
do appreciate beauty and art, and
their domains are often decorated
with valuable crafts and creative
works. Their armor and weapons
are similarly ornate, and they
always clean and polish their gear
after battle. Archons value order-
and thus tidiness-in all things.
of justice. A legion archon can throw its flame of justice as a ranged weapon. If
disarmed or thrown, the flame of justice vanishes after landing or dealing damage
and reappears in the legion archon’s hands again instantly. On a critical hit, the fire
damage from the flame of justice deals maximum damage (6 on the d6) before being
doubled for the critical hit, and the target takes 1d10 persistent fire damage.
A-C
29

28
OTHER ARCHONS
Many other archons than those
presented here patrol Heaven or
crusade in the fiendish planes,
including the resolute hound
archon soldiers and sentinels,
and the supreme bastion archons,
who rank among Heaven’s most
powerful defenders.
Shield Archon
Shield archons defend the fortresses of Heaven against fiendish incursions. They
wield their spears and shields in massive formations capable of withstanding any
onslaught. Beneath their armor, they are sheathed in skin of steel. Given their
tremendous strength and imposing stature, shield archons are ideal guardians
of the meek and are sometimes summoned to the Material Plane to ward off the
attacks of great numbers of evildoers.
SHIELD ARCHON CREATURE 10
LG LARGE ARCHON CELESTIAL
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Athletics +21, Diplomacy +19, Intimidation +19, Religion +19, Survival +17
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +7, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +3
Items +1 full plate
Morphic Hands [one-action] (divine, transmutation) A shield archon’s hands can change
into a +1 holy striking spear and a lesser sturdy shield or
back into hands. Transforming does not restore any
HP to the items, and if either the weapon or shield
is fully destroyed, the archon loses that hand until
it receives a regenerate spell or similar magic. If a
shield archon is slain, its weapon and shield can
be taken, but they fade into nothingness after
24 hours.
AC 31 (33 with shield raised); Fort +23, Ref +15,
Will +19; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 125; Weaknesses evil 10
Living Shield A shield archon’s shield is the focal
point of its courage and soul. It always has
its shield raised without needing to Raise a
Shield, and it can use Shield Block as a free
action instead of a reaction (Hardness 10,
HP 80). A shield archon can trigger its Shield
Block free action when an ally within 10 feet
is the target of an attack, reducing damage
to that ally instead of itself but otherwise
following the normal rules of Shield Block.
Menacing Guardian (aura, divine, enchantment)
As horned archon, but DC 27.
Retributive Strike [reaction]
Speed 30 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] holy striking spear +22 (magical,
reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+10 piercing plus
1d6 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 27; 4th dimension
door (at will); 2nd shield other (×3); 1st
true strike (×3); Cantrips (5th) message;
Constant (5th) tongues
Archon’s Door As horned archon.
Courageous Switch When a shield archon
uses its dimension door innate spell, it
can choose to move into the space of
a willing ally it can see within range.
If it does so, the ally switches places
with the archon, appearing in the
space the archon just vacated, as if
it too had cast dimension door.
A-C
31

30
AZATA DIVINITIES
The most powerful of all azatas
belong to the cast of demigods
known as empyreal lords. These
lesser deities maintain many cults
across many Material Plane worlds,
and count among their kind such
diverse demigods as Ashava, a
protector of lost spirits and dancer
in the moonlight; Black Butterfly,
a mysterious agent of Desna and
patron of the depths of outer space;
and Sinashakti, joyful wanderer and
deliverer of wisdom to vagabonds.
Azata
Azatas are manifestations of freedom-kindly celestials with a penchant for
curious exploration, spontaneous revelry, and whimsical quests. Born of the
untamable wilds of Elysium, azatas are passionate and mercurial, but also fiercely
loyal to those they hold dear. Azatas act quickly and directly against fiendish and
otherworldly influences, but they tend to stay out of mortal affairs otherwise,
allowing them the ultimate freedom to choose their own destiny. While all
azatas cherish freedom, each type exemplifies a particular freedom above others.
Many of their kind hold strange knightly and courtly titles that defy mortal
classification and shift and change with time and on different occasions rather
than following a strict hierarchy. This baffles archons and other more lawful
creatures who haven’t had much contact with azatas. In actuality, the azatas use
their titles as personal flourishes and points of pride, rather than as excuses to
order each other around.
Lyrakien (Wanderer Azata)
Lyrakiens are musical messengers and embodiments of free travel. They serve
Desna and other deities and empyreal lords of Elysium, but are quite fond of
the concept of free time and are always on the hunt for opportunities to pause
in their duties to enjoy music or appreciate a moment of beauty.
They love contests, stories, and songs, and they often challenge
mortals to musical contests or pester them to share grand tales of
their exploits. Lyrakiens rely on their agility to avoid conflicts, but
they do their best to defend places of great natural beauty, especially
against lawful or evil foes they can damage with their starlight.
Lyrakiens have an innate wanderlust and rarely stay in the same place
for very long. Some travel alongside adventurers, ofter writing songs
about their quests and feats of derring-do.
Though light-hearted creatures, lyrakiens don’t let their whimsical
personalities get in the way of protecting breathtaking natural
locations. Often called “glistenwings” by gnomes and halflings, they
are frequently mistaken for sprites or similar fey, a bit of confusion
that many lyrakiens find amusing and fertile ground for shenanigans
involving those they deem deserving of a bit of unexpected fun and
discord in their lives.
LYRAKIEN CREATURE 1
CG TINY AZATA CELESTIAL
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +9, Diplomacy +6, Performance +8, Religion +6, Stealth +7
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +3
AC 17; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +6
HP 25; Weaknesses cold iron 3, evil 3
Speed 25 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +9 (agile, chaotic, finesse, good, magical), Damage 1d4–2 bludgeoning
plus 1 chaotic and 1 good
Ranged [one-action] starlight ray +9 (chaotic, good, light, range 10 feet), Damage 1d4
chaotic and 1d4 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 1st detect alignment (at will; evil
only), heal, illusory object; Cantrips (1st) dancing lights, daze, detect magic;
Constant (4th) freedom of movement
Starlight Blast [two-actions] (chaotic, good, light) The lyrakien unleashes a blast
of holy starlight in a 5-foot burst centered on itself. Creatures in the
area take 1d6 chaotic damage and 1d6 good damage (DC 17 basic
Reflex save). The lyrakien can’t use Starlight Blast or its starlight
ray ranged attack for 1d4 rounds.
A-C
31

30
WANDERING AZATAS
While the idyllic realm of Elysium
is the home plane of azatas, their
overwhelming curiosity and
natural wanderlust often lead
them to travel far from this plane.
On other planes, they can be
seeking to right wrongs, looking
for entertainment, or merely
exploring to see the sights. More
than a few azatas, taken by a
whimsical urge to spread their
sometimes unwelcome jocosity,
see it as their duty to tease uptight
or humorless mortal creatures.
Gancanagh (Passion Azata)
Gancanaghs are lovers, revelers, and dashing duelists of Elysium. Embodiments of
free love, they eagerly throw themselves into courting targets for brief but earnest
flings until their quicksilver passions change their desires. They serve Cayden
Cailean as well as other bacchanalian deities and empyreal lords of Elysium
who understand their desires for love and parties. Gancanaghs hate evil beings
that profane the spirit of romance and passion, as such creatures (especially the
demonic tempters known as succubi) reinforce stigmas against open and free love.
One can give no greater insult to a gancanagh than to mistake him for such a
creature, and more than one hotheaded gancanagh has challenged a misinformed
paladin or other champion of good to a duel over such a slight. While they enjoy
drinking and carousing, gancanaghs can’t stand smoke. Nonetheless, many
gancanaghs carry whimsical-looking smoking pipes because they think it makes
them look dapper. They cherish their silver flutes, for they enjoy the beauty of
flutes’ music and its ability to sway the heart.
The majority of gancanaghs present themselves as male, but the concept of
gender to a creature like a gancanagh, which can change its shape freely,
is much more fluid and open to interpretation than for many mortals.
Gancanaghs enjoy using this flexibility to confront and test mortals’
convictions when faced with fear or prejudice, but when encountering
mortals who themselves are open-minded about sexuality or gender identity,
they can become lifelong allies. For those who are persecuted for such reasons,
gancanaghs are tireless defenders and eager supporters, quick to provide safety
and to punish those who would attempt to impose narrower beliefs upon a
world that deserves more diversity than it often gets. If possible, a gancanagh
seeks to educate and redeem those who hold destructive beliefs or prejudices,
resorting to combat only to defend themself or an endangered mortal, or when
no other option seems tenable-yet even then, they fight with sadness.
GANCANAGH CREATURE 4
CG MEDIUM AZATA CELESTIAL
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Athletics +9, Deception +13, Diplomacy +13, Performance +14, Religion +9,
Stealth +11
Str +1, Dex +5, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +5
Items silver rapier, silver virtuoso flute
AC 21; Fort +9, Ref +13, Will +11
HP 75; Weaknesses cold iron 5, evil 5
Vulnerable to Smoke A gancanagh’s lungs can’t tolerate smoke. They
take a –2 circumstance penalty to saving throws against effects that
create some form of smoke.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] silver rapier +13 (deadly 1d10, disarm, finesse, good, magical), Damage
1d6+7 piercing plus 1d4 good
Divine Innate Spells DC 23; 4th suggestion; 3rd heroism; 2nd heal, mirror image
(at will); 1st charm (at will); Constant (5th) tongues
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The gancanagh
can take on the appearance of any Small or Medium humanoid. This doesn’t
change their Speed or their attack and damage bonuses with their Strikes, but
might change the damage type their Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning).
Invigorating Passion [two-actions] (divine, emotion, enchantment, mental) The gancanagh
embraces or kisses a willing creature, infusing that creature with their
invigorating passion. The creature gains a +1 status bonus to attack rolls
and 10 temporary Hit Points for 10 minutes. After that time, the target
becomes fatigued for 10 minutes unless they succeed at a DC 21
Fortitude save.
A-C
33

32
AZATA TREASURES
While azatas would like to think
they are above material wealth,
the truth is that most azatas adore
finery and displays of beauty or
grandeur. They might explain away
bejeweled weapons as necessary
tools against the forces of evil,
or the wild array of jewelry and
silks they wear as important
diplomatic tools.
Lillend (Muse Azata)
Lillends are tale-tellers, chroniclers, and champions of freedom of expression.
They are generally peaceful, but are quick to act if a masterful piece of art
is threatened or free speech is suppressed. They pride themselves on inspiring
mortals to greater heights of expression and creativity, and more than one bard
looks to a lillend as their personal inspiration. Lillends sometimes secretly
follow the adventures of mortal heroes to record their stories as epic poems
and songs, which they then perform in the packed mead halls of Elysium. When
pursuing such goals, lillends take pains to use their innate spells to remain in
hiding, as they would rather observe and record events without “polluting” them
with their own intervention. Nevertheless, a lillend who sees their charge faced
with certain death often cannot resist the urge to intervene and save the day.
Inevitably, this brings a close to the lillend’s chronicles, as their relationship with
their subject invariably shifts from one of detached observation to friendship
or more. Yet lillends remain hesitant to involve themselves for
overlong in a mortal’s life, in part because they fear what sort of
fiendish attention their presence might attract, but mostly out
of respect for the mortal’s own destiny. A lillend would, all
things being equal, prefer to let mortals choose their own
fate rather than run the risk of sending someone down
a path to which their heart is not set.
LILLEND CREATURE 7
CG LARGE AZATA CELESTIAL
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; speak
with animals, speak with plants, tongues
Skills Acrobatics +14, Deception +16, Diplomacy
+18, Nature +14, Performance +20, Religion
+14, Survival +12
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +5
Items +1 longsword, virtuoso harp
AC 25; Fort +14, Ref +16, Will +16
HP 145; Weaknesses cold iron 10, evil 10
Free Expression A lillend’s auditory and
sonic effects attempt to counteract
any effect that would directly control,
manipulate, or prevent them from
expressing themself freely, such as
silence. She can also spend an action,
which has concentrate trait, to speak
forcefully and counteract such effects.
Speed 25 feet, fly 45 feet
Melee [one-action] longsword +18 (chaotic,
magical, versatile P), Damage 1d8+10
slashing plus 1d6 chaotic and 1d6 good
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d6+10 bludgeoning plus 1d6 chaotic,
1d6 good, and Grab
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 4th counter
performance, hallucinatory terrain, heal, inspire
heroics, sound burst, suggestion; 3rd sleep; 2nd
darkness, invisibility; 1st charm; Cantrips (4th)
daze, detect magic, ghost sound, inspire competence,
inspire courage, light; Constant (5th) tongues; (4th)
speak with plants; (2nd) speak with animals
A-C
33

32
OTHER AZATAS
The wilds of Elysium play host
to a wide array of azatas, the
most varied and widespread of
the celestials. From the foureyed mothlike uinuja to the
supernaturally verdant and
beautiful veranallia, whose lower
body is a wondrous garden of
wildflowers and plant life, azatas
are nothing if not diverse!
Ghaele (Crusader Azata)
Ghaeles are fiend-hunting knights of Elysium and champions of the freedom to take
up arms against oppressors and other evils. Ghaeles rarely engage directly in mortal
wars, but where fiends are involved they make an exception. A ghaele might assume
the guise of a mortal to fight fiends alongside others, hoping to bolster morale and
teach good tactics against such supernatural foes. Ghaeles serve various deities and
empyreal lords of Elysium, though many have an affinity for Cayden Cailean in
his capacity as a champion of freedom and defender of the downtrodden. Among
azatas, ghaeles are generally the quickest to shift to violence as a method of solving
problems, but even then they seek to minimize pain and suffering when they can.
GHAELE CREATURE 13
CG MEDIUM AZATA CELESTIAL
Perception +25; darkvision, see invisibility
Languages Celestial, Draconic, Infernal; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +27, Athletics +26, Diplomacy +26 Nature +23, Religion +23,
Stealth +21, Warfare Lore +26
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +5
Items +1 greatsword
AC 34; Fort +26, Ref +20, Will +23
HP 235; Weaknesses cold iron 15, evil 15; Resistances energy 15 (see
Choose Weakness)
Free Blade [free-action] Trigger The ghaele ends its turn while unable to act or
attempts a greatsword Strike that would take a circumstance or
status penalty. Effect A ghaele’s blade is implacable in the pursuit
of freedom, and its energies can overpower any effect that would
interfere with its swordplay. The ghaele attempts to counteract
each effect that prevents it from making a greatsword Strike, gives
it a penalty to its greatsword Strike, or prevents it from acting. The
ghaele can use this ability even if it’s otherwise unable to act.
Light Form A ghaele’s body is partially corporeal and partially composed
of light, with a color corresponding to the elemental energy currently
residing in its blade (see Choose Weakness). It can move through solid
objects but can’t end its action within a solid object.
Speed 35 feet, fly 100 feet
Melee [one-action] holy greatsword +28 (good, magical, versatile P), Damage
2d12+13 slashing plus 1d6 good and 1d6 other (see Choose Weakness)
Ranged [one-action] light ray +25 (chaotic, good, light, range 300 feet), Damage
1d12 chaotic plus 1d12 good plus 2d6+6 other (see Choose Weakness)
Divine Innate Spells DC 33; 7th chromatic wall, dispel magic, heal, prismatic
spray; 6th illusory scene; 5th banishment; 4th heal (×4), invisibility (at will;
self only), restoration; 3rd mind reading; 2nd continual flame (at will), dispel
magic (at will); 1st charm, detect alignment (at will; evil only), illusory disguise
(at will); Cantrips (7th) dancing lights, detect magic, light; Constant (7th) see
invisibility; (5th) tongues
Divine Rituals DC 33; resurrect
Choose Weakness [one-action] (concentrate, divination, divine, evocation, manipulate) A
ghaele attempts to Recall Knowledge about a foe it is facing. If successful, it
can change the elemental damage dealt by its greatsword and light ray to acid,
cold, electricity, fire, or sonic, usually to match the a foe’s weakness. It can also
change its energy resistance to any of these energy types (this can be a different
type than for its attacks). The choices remain until it next uses Choose Weakness.
Ghaele’s Gaze [one-action] (divine, evocation, visual) When a ghaele fixes its gaze upon a non-good
creature, the creature suffers the effects of divine decree (DC 33 Will save). If it survives,
the creature is temporarily immune to Ghaele’s Gaze for 1 minute.
Holy Blade (divine, evocation) Any weapon becomes a +2 holy striking weapon
while the ghaele wields it.
A-C
35

34
BORN FROM TRAGEDY
The banshee represents one of the
most tragic of undead, a soul so
wracked with agony and fury over
a betrayal in life that, in death, it
lingers on as a great evil. That most
of those who become banshees
were not evil in life only deepens
this tragic theme, and many elven
adventurers see it as their duty
not only to put banshees to rest,
but to right the wrong that
saw their creation in the
first place.
Banshee
Banshees are the furious, tormented souls of elves bound to the Material Plane
by a betrayal that defined the final hours of their lives. Some banshees arise from
elves who were slain by trusted friends and allies, or whose loved ones betrayed
them on their deathbeds. Others spawn from elves whose treacherous deeds
shortly before their deaths left a stain upon their souls. Regardless of their origin,
banshees despise the living. This hatred of life is all too often a horrific inversion
of their personalities in life. Some speculate that the more kind-hearted the elf
(and the more wrenching the betrayal), the crueler the banshee.
Banshees rarely stray far from where they perished and typically haunt
thick forests and canopied swamps where little light graces the ground. Many
banshees can be found in the elven nation of Kyonin, specifically in Tanglebriar,
the sinister domain of the demon Treerazer. Similarly, a large number of banshees
can be found lurking about the edges of drow settlements in the Darklands, as
plenty of cruelty and betrayal exists in drow culture.
Banshees’ mere touch inflicts pain and primal fear, and those
exposed to their wails of grief rarely survive the experience.
BANSHEE CREATURE 17
UNCOMMON CE MEDIUM INCORPOREAL SPIRIT UNDEAD
Perception +32; hears heartbeats (imprecise) 60 feet, darkvision
Languages Common, Elven
Skills Acrobatics +31, Intimidation +32, Occultism +25
Str –5, Dex +6, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +7, Cha +7
Hears Heartbeats The banshee can hear heartbeats within 60 feet (imprecise).
Sunlight Powerlessness If in direct sunlight, the banshee is slowed 1 and
can’t use actions that have the attack trait.
AC 39; Fort +25, Ref +29, Will +32
HP 250, negative healing; Immunities disease, paralyzed, poison,
precision, unconscious; Resistances all damage 12 (except force,
ghost touch, or positive; double resistance vs. non-magical)
Vengeful Spite [reaction] (evocation, occult); Trigger A foe critically hits
the banshee, or the banshee critically fails their save against a foe’s
damaging effect. Effect The banshee lashes back at their tormentor,
dealing 4d10+14 mental damage (DC 38 basic Will save) and applying
the effects of terrifying touch based on the results of the same Will save.
Speed fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] hand +32 (finesse, magical), Damage 4d10+14 negative plus
terrifying touch
Spectral Ripple When a banshee Strides at least 10 feet, they’re
concealed until the start of their next turn.
Terrifying Touch (emotion, enchantment, fear, occult) A creature damaged
by the banshee’s touch that isn’t already frightened must attempt a DC
38 Will save (DC 43 if the attack was a critical hit). If the creature fails
its save, it’s frightened 2; on a critical failure, the creature also cowers
with fear and is stunned 4. If the creature is protected against fear by a
spell or magic item, the banshee’s touch first attempts to counteract the
protection effect, with the effect of a 9th-level dispel magic spell.
Wail [two-actions](auditory, concentrate, death, necromancy, occult) The banshee
unleashes a soul-chilling wail of the banshee (DC 38). This Wail overcomes
silence and similar effects of 5th level or lower. The banshee can instead
use Wail as a three-action activity to overcome such effects of up to
8th level.
The banshee's Wail resonates for 1 round, and any creature that comes
within the area during that time must attempt a save against the effect. A
creature can’t be affected more than once by the same Wail. The banshee
can’t Wail again for 1d4 rounds.
A-C
35

34
MYSTERIOUS ORIGINS
All too often, those who study
stranger monsters make the
assumption that they were
created by powerful but ill-advised
wizards or are the result of ancient
manipulations from the alghollthu
empire. In the case of the baomal,
extensive research suggests that
neither of these explanations are
accurate. No ancient texts have yet
been recovered in which a wizard
claims to have created the first
baomal. And while the alghollthu
of today use them as warbeasts,
ancient carvings suggest that in
the earliest days, baomals were
ravenous hunters of alghollthus.
Baomal
Few sea monsters are as dreaded and feared as the two-headed baomal. These
massive predatory beasts typically dwell in the deepest waters and compete with
krakens and other monsters for food. They feed on whales and other large sea
creatures, sometimes following them to the water’s surface. Near the surface,
baomals that encounter ships quickly learn that they contain a variety of tasty
morsels. The creatures use their devastating spikes to rip open the ships’ hulls,
then leisurely feed on the helpless sailors.
BAOMAL CREATURE 20
CN GARGANTUAN ABERRATION AQUATIC
Perception +34; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 80 feet
Languages Aklo
Skills Athletics +41, Stealth +31, Survival +37
Str +10, Dex +2, Con +8, Int –3, Wis +6, Cha +1
AC 48; Fort +36, Ref +30, Will +34
HP 315; Resistances physical 10
All-Around Vision
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Double Opportunity A baomal gains an extra reaction each
round that it can use only to make an Attack of Opportunity.
It must use a different head for each one it attempts, and
it can’t make more than one Attack of Opportunity for the
same triggering action.
Psychic Static Aura (aura, divination, mental, occult) 120 feet.
All creatures, except aberrations, that begin their turn in
the area take 5d6 mental damage.
Two Heads Any ability that would sever
a baomal’s head (such as a critical hit
with a vorpal weapon) severs one
head at random. Losing one head
doesn’t kill a baomal, but it does
prevent the baomal from making Strikes
with the lost head and from using Double
Opportunity or Two-Headed Strike.
Speed 50 feet, swim 80 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +38 (reach 20 feet),
Damage 4d12+18 piercing plus Improved Grab
Ranged [one-action] tsunami jet +38 (brutal, range 500 feet), Damage 4d10+18
bludgeoning plus Push 40 feet
Breath of the Sea [one-action] (attack) A baomal can inhale tremendous
amounts of water, drawing everything in the sea nearby
closer. All creatures and objects in the water within
60 feet of the baomal (including ships) are
pulled toward it. Creatures must succeed at
a DC 42 Athletics check or be pulled up to
20 feet toward the baomal (40 feet on a critical failure). For ships, use the captain’s
Sailing Lore in place of Athletics. Unattended objects are automatically pulled.
Shell Rake [one-action] (move) The baomal Swims or Strides alongside a creature or the hull of a
vessel, dealing damage with the strong spikes on its shell. Each creature or ship the
baomal is adjacent to at any point during its movement takes 6d6+10 slashing and
piercing damage (DC 42 basic Reflex save). Against vessels, Shell Rake ignores the
first 5 Hardness and creates an explosion of splinters that deals 3d6+5 damage to
every creature within 10 feet of the deck’s edge (DC 42 basic Reflex save).
Two-Headed Strike [two-actions] The baomal makes a Strike with each set of jaws, each against a
different creature. These Strikes count as one attack for the baomal’s multiple attack
penalty, and the penalty doesn’t increase until after both attacks.
A-C
37

36
Barghest
Barghests are lupine fiends with goblinoid faces and humanoid hands. They stalk
the Material Plane in search of souls to sate their demonic hunger. Eons ago,
barghests dwelled in the pits of Hell and served Asmodeus, but after Lamashtu
abducted and adopted the four most powerful of their kind to serve as pets (and in
time, as a pantheon of hero-gods worshipped by evil goblins), barghests’ loyalties
and philosophical nature changed significantly. Today, while barghests retain their
connection to goblinoids, they serve none but their own appetites.
Barghest
Typical barghests are ravenous gluttons of life who feed and grow on the fat of
mortals, their bodies changing in ways none can predict as they use the flesh and
blood of their victims to achieve grisly transformations into greater barghests.
Barghests often make use of their shapechanging abilities to rule tribes of
goblinoids or to discreetly hunt in rural areas in the guise of unnaturally intelligent
wolves. They do not work well together, as each barghest wants all the kills for
itself; cannibalism is the typical result of too many barghests in one small area.
BARGHEST CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM FIEND
Perception +12; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Abyssal, Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +10, Deception +12, Diplomacy +9, Intimidation +11, Stealth +10,
Survival +8
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +12, Will +8
HP 50; Resistances fire 5, physical 5 (except magical)
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +13, Damage 2d8+5 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +13 (agile), Damage 2d6+5 slashing
Divine Innate Spells DC 21; 4th blink (at will), confusion, dimension door (self
only); 3rd levitate (at will); 1st charm
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
The barghest takes on the shape of a goblinoid (a goblin, hobgoblin,
or bugbear) or a wolf, or it transforms back into its true form. When
the barghest is a goblinoid, it loses its jaws and claw Strikes, it
becomes Small if it is a goblin, and its Speed changes to 20 feet.
When the barghest is a wolf, its Speed changes to 40 feet and
its jaws gain Knockdown. Each individual barghest has only one
goblinoid form and one wolf form.
Feed Once per month, a barghest can spend 1 minute to devour a
corpse, gaining a permanent +1 status bonus to its checks and DCs.
Each subsequent time it feeds, this bonus increases by 1. The fourth
time a barghest feeds, it sheds its skin and mutates into a greater
barghest, and the status bonus ends.
Greater Barghest
Once a barghest has eaten enough to grow into a
greater barghest, it typically seeks a method to
leave the Material Plane and return to the Abyss,
there joining other fiends as yet another of that
plane’s horrors. As barghests have no innate
ability to travel the planes, though, the
time it takes for most greater barghests
to engineer such a return can
usually be measured in years, if
BARGHEST HERO-GODS
The four barghests stolen from
Hell’s kennels by the deity
Lamashtu were not the originals of
their kind, but they were then and
remain today the most powerful.
Now they are denizens of the
Abyss, dwelling in their own realm
adjacent to Lamashtu’s domain,
and are heavily worshipped by
goblins across multiple worlds as
“hero-gods.” These four barghests
include Hadregash the slaver,
Venkelvore the torturer, Zarongel
the dog slayer, and Zogmugot
the scavenger. 
A-C
37

36
not decades. During that time, greater barghests continue to play the roles of
gluttons, hunters of humanity, and tyrants of goblinoid tribes. More than a few
grow accustomed to such lives on the Material Plane and wholly abandon the
end goal of returning to the Abyss, despite the fact that those who do make
such a return home often grow even more powerful over time, gaining eerie new
abilities and qualities absorbed from the raw chaos of the Abyss itself.
In addition to greater barghests being more powerful than typical barghests,
the process of transforming into a greater barghest results in hideous mutations
that often grant deadly abilities. Some barghests grow large bat-like wings upon
their transformation. Others develop toxic breath or vestigial limbs. The options
detailed in the stats below represent only the tip of the proverbial iceberg for
barghest mutations-feel free to use these as inspiration for coming up with
new mutations of your own design.
GREATER BARGHEST CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON CE LARGE FIEND MUTANT
Perception +16; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Abyssal, Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics + 15, Deception +18, Diplomacy +14, Intimidation +16,
Stealth +15, Survival +14
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +5
AC 25; Fort +17, Ref +15, Will +12
HP 105; Weaknesses good 5, lawful 5; Resistances fire 10, physical 10 (except magical)
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +17, Damage 2d10+6 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage 2d8+6 slashing
Divine Innate Spells DC 25; 4th blink (at will), confusion, dimension door,
enlarge; 3rd levitate (at will); 2nd invisibility (at will); 1st charm
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
As barghest.
Mutations The process of consuming corpses to
evolve into a greater barghest results in odd and
unpredictable physiological changes. A greater
barghest has one mutation, typically chosen from
the following options.
• Fangs (poison) The barghest grows elongated fangs
that seep poison. Its jaws deal 1d6 additional poison
damage and 1d6 persistent poison damage.
• Toxic Breath [two-actions] (divine, evocation, poison) The
barghest breathes a cloud of toxic gas that deals 8d6
poison damage to all creatures in a 30-foot cone (DC 25
basic Fortitude save). It can’t use Toxic Breath again for
1d4 rounds.
• Vestigial Arm Strike [free-action] Frequency once
per round; Trigger The barghest completes
a Strike. Effect The barghest makes a claw
Strike with a shriveled third arm hanging
from its torso. This attack doesn’t count for the
barghest’s multiple attack penalty, nor does
that penalty apply on
the attack.
• Wings The barghest
has malformed wings
extending from its
back. It gains a fly Speed
of 25 feet.
BARGHEST CULTS
The barghest hero-gods may
be the only ones of their kind
capable of granting spells to
their clerics, but the idea of
adoring worshippers appeals to
all barghests. A barghest that
completes its transformation into
a greater barghest, and thus is no
longer morbidly distracted by its
hunger, often plays the role of a
deity to ignorant groups of goblins
or other monsters. To them, the
fact that the barghest can’t grant
spells is irrelevant-rather, their
veneration is due the fact that
worshipping the barghest is the
best way to keep it from devouring
the entire tribe.
A-C
39

38
Basilisk
The basilisk is an eight-legged reptile with a nasty disposition and the ability
to turn creatures to stone with its gaze. Folklore holds that, much like for the
cockatrice, the first basilisks hatched from leathery eggs laid by snakes and
incubated by roosters, but little in the basilisk’s physiology lends any credence
to this claim.
A basilisk prefers to eat petrified flesh. Once a victim has been turned to
stone, the basilisk crunches the fossilized corpse with its powerful jaws and lets
its potent stomach acids do the rest. This digestive process is extremely slow
and inefficient, causing the basilisk to move so lethargically that it appears as
if in mid-petrification itself. This has even led to the saying “as slow as a wellfed basilisk.” Certainly basilisks are well-known for their slow gait and slothful
nature, but a predator that can turn its prey to stone with a glance hardly has
much need for speed.
An adult basilisk is 13 feet long from head to tail and weighs roughly 300
pounds. These reptiles make hissing sounds when moving about that turns to
a guttural gurgle when they’re agitated. Though they are normally solitary
creatures that come together only to mate and lay eggs, there are periodic reports
of regions being infested with unusual numbers of basilisks. What causes these
unusual congregations of basilisk activity is unknown.
For unknown reasons, weasels and ferrets are immune to the basilisk’s stare,
and they sometimes sneak into basilisk lairs while a parent is hunting in order
to consume eggs or freshly hatched young. Some legends suggest that a
basilisk’s blood can transmute common stones into other material, but this
is likely a case of witnesses misinterpreting the magical restoration of
previously petrified creatures or body parts.
BASILISK CREATURE 5
N MEDIUM BEAST
Perception +11; darkvision
Skills Athletics +13, Stealth +8
Str +4, Dex –1, Con +5, Int –3, Wis +2, Cha +1
AC 22; Fort +14, Ref +8, Will +11
HP 75
Petrifying Glance [reaction] (arcane, aura, transmutation, visual); Trigger A
creature within 30 feet that the basilisk can see starts its turn.
Effect The target must attempt a DC 20 Fortitude save. If it fails,
it’s slow 1 for 1 minute as its body slowly stiffens.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +15, Damage 2d8+4 piercing
Petrifying Gaze [two-actions] (arcane, concentrate,
incapacitation, transmutation, visual); The basilisk
stares at a creature it can see within 30 feet. That
creature must attempt a DC 22 Fortitude save. If it
fails and has not already been slowed by Petrifying
Glance or this ability, it becomes slowed 1. If
the creature was already slowed by this ability
or Petrifying Glance, a failed save causes the
creature to be petrified permanently.
A creature petrified in this manner that
is coated (not just splashed) with fresh
basilisk blood (taken from a basilisk
that has been dead no longer than
1 hour) is instantly restored to
flesh. A single basilisk contains
enough blood to coat 1d3 Medium
creatures in this manner.
BASILISK LAIRS
Basilisks can be found in almost
any terrestrial environment,
including forests, hills, mountains,
plains, and swamps. They tend
to dwell in caves or sheltered
areas, and their hides often bear
complexions that allow them
to more easily blend with their
environments. As a result, forestdwelling basilisks may have scales
of a verdant emerald color to
match surrounding vegetation,
while a basilisk that lives in the
desert may be a sandy brown or
shale color.
A-C
39

38
Bat
A wide range of bats dwell throughout the world. Most of these nocturnal animals
are harmless insectivores, but deadly breeds of vampire bats and oversized bats
the size of horses pose much more significant threats to adventurers.
Vampire Bat Swarm
Although the typical vampire bat has a wingspan of 7 inches and doesn’t pose
a significant threat to larger prey alone (and indeed, these blood-drinkers can
feed without their sleeping victims ever noticing), some unusually aggressive
species of these bats hunt in deadly swarms. A churning cloud of vampire bats
is much more dangerous than the sum of its individual parts and is capable of
inflicting an overwhelming number of bleeding wounds in a frighteningly short
span of time.
VAMPIRE BAT SWARM CREATURE 1
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +10; echolocation (precise) 20 feet, low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +4 (+7 to Climb), Stealth +7
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha –3
Echolocation A bat swarm can use its hearing as a precise sense at the listed range.
AC 15; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 11; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses area damage 3, splash damage 3;
Resistances bludgeoning 6, piercing 6, slashing 3
Speed 5 feet, fly 30 feet
Blood Feast [one-action] Each enemy in the bat swarm’s space takes 1d4 piercing damage (DC 16
basic Reflex save). Creatures that fail this save also take 1 persistent bleed damage.
Giant Bat
While big bats are certainly not uncommon in dark caves and abandoned ruins
and may instill fear in squeamish spelunkers, the so-called giant bat is a true
monster, weighing well over 100 pounds and having a wingspan of nearly 15
feet. It primarily eats fruit and bugs, but can be incited to violence through fear
or hunger. Giant bat attacks can quickly give rise to rumors
of more dangerous monsters-many mistake these massive
animals for some sort of demon or vampiric monster. But like
other bats, giant bats are simply social and intelligent mammals.
They are sometimes used as mounts by smaller humanoids,
commonly those who hail from or dwell in mountainous or
underground regions.
GIANT BAT CREATURE 2
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +11; echolocation (precise) 40
feet, low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +8, Stealth +8
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha –2
Echolocation A bat can use its hearing as a precise
sense at the listed range.
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +7
HP 30
Wing Thrash [reaction] Trigger An adjacent enemy damages the
giant bat. Effect The bat makes one or two wing Strikes-
one against the triggering creature and one against another
adjacent creature.
Speed 15 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +10, Damage 1d10+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
BAT LOCATIONS
Vampire bat swarms roost in
colonies wherever they can
find shelter from weather, light,
and predators, favoring caves,
trees, and narrow gorges. Giant
bats prefer to dwell in smaller
numbers in deep caves, abandoned
mines, or the attics of abandoned
buildings. Even larger species
dwell in the deeper regions of
the Darklands, where they are
often used as mounts, or even
ritualistically slaughtered and then
animated as specialized undead
guardians of eerie underground
cities and nations.
Bestiary
40
Bear
Bears are ferocious predators typically found in cold or temperate woodlands
and hills. Many species of bear exist in addition to the two presented below,
such as the smaller (but no less dangerous) black bear or the arctic-dwelling
polar bear.
Grizzly Bear
This large and powerful omnivore inhabits forested hills. While it typically
sustains itself on nuts, berries, fish, and small mammals, it’s fiercely territorial
and will chase off or kill any creature it views as competition. Grizzly bears are
especially temperamental when their young are nearby. In combat, a grizzly bear
often attempts to grab and maul its foe with surprising ferocity. It continues its
assault until its foe seems like it is no longer a threat, though if the bear is hungry,
it will not hesitate to feed.
GRIZZLY BEAR CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +10; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +11, Survival +8
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +12, Ref +6, Will +8
HP 45
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 2d8+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile), Damage 1d10+4 slashing plus Grab
Mauler The grizzly bear gains a +2 circumstance bonus to damage rolls against creatures
it has grabbed.
Rush [two-actions] The grizzly bear Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement.
During the Stride, the grizzly bear gains a +10-foot circumstance bonus to its Speed.
Cave Bear
Larger, stronger, and far more aggressive than its smaller cousins, the cave
bear is a behemoth that avoids civilized lands, preferring to dwell in
remote places. As its name might suggest, the cave bear makes its den in
natural caves, and like the grizzly bear, a cave bear is fiercely territorial.
Unlike a grizzly bear, however, a cave bear is short tempered and will
make sure its foe is dead before moving on, usually feasting on its
prey’s soft flesh once it has been incapacitated. Cave bears are often
regarded as powerful guardian spirits by remote-dwelling people,
while they are utilized as beasts of war by orcs or even giants-stone
giants in particular have an affinity for keeping trained cave bears as
pets or guardians for their homes.
CAVE BEAR CREATURE 6
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +13; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +16, Survival +11
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 24; Fort +16, Ref +11, Will +13
HP 95
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +16, Damage 2d10+6 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile), Damage 2d8+6 slashing plus Grab
Mauler The bear gains a +4 circumstance bonus to damage rolls against creatures
it has grabbed.
Rush[two-actions] The cave bear Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement.
During the Stride, it gains a +10-foot circumstance bonus to its Speed.
BEAR RESOURCES
A bear den can contain valuable
treasures, such as the remains of
less fortunate adventurers who
stumbled into a hungry bear’s
path. Bear furs themselves are
valued as rugs, while their claws
and fangs make for impressive
jewelry or adornments for armor.
Bear hide is an excellent resource
for hide armor.
A-C
41
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
BEETLE TREASURES
Beetles do not collect treasure,
but the two light-producing
organs of a flash beetle can be
recovered from the creature
and used for illumination-based
chemical recipes, spell
components, and magic
item creation.
BEETLE SPECIES
Numerous other species of giant
beetle exist in the wilds. Duergars
train deep-dwelling beetles as
mounts and guardians. Bombardier
beetles can spew caustic acid as
a potent attack. And the truly
immense goliath beetles can
devastate entire buildings or even
castles with frightening ease.
Beetle
Not all beetles are harmless creatures that can be easily crushed underfoot.
Oversized and ravenous giant beetles can be found throughout the temperate
and tropical regions of the world. They are often benign creatures, though when
threatened or roused, giant beetles are quite dangerous. Their powerful mandibles
and tough exoskeletons make for a challenging combatant.
Flash Beetle
These 3-foot-long insects boast a pair of glowing organs on the back of the
abdomen that give off bright light and that continue to glow for days, even after
the creature’s death. Flash beetles are commonly herded and harvested by miners
and spelunkers, as their glow is considered safer than torches and less expensive
than lamps. Denizens of the Darklands often domesticate and train these insects,
using them as pets, livestock, or caging them to use as organic sources of light in
areas frequented by visitors unaccustomed to the darkness.
FLASH BEETLE CREATURE –1
N SMALL ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +4
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 16; Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +4
HP 6
Luminescent Aura (aura, light) 10 feet. The flash beetle’s bioluminescent organs fill the
area with bright light.
Speed 20 feet, fly 15 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Light Flash [one-action] (concentrate, light) The flash beetle creates a brilliant flash of
light. All creatures in its luminescent aura must succeed at a DC 17
Fortitude save or be dazzled for 1 minute. The flash beetle’s glow
then goes out, disabling its aura for 24 hours, during which
time it cannot use Light Flash.
Giant Stag Beetle
The giant stag beetle is larger than a horse, and the sight of
one flying (if slowly and somewhat clumsily) on great buzzing
wings is unnerving. Its enormous mandibles are used to impress
mates, intimidate rivals, and discourage predators, for they can
deliver deadly blows. While giant stag beetles are deadly predators,
they can be domesticated by skilled wranglers. In such a capacity, these
beetles serve well as beasts of burden or even as mounts.
Giant stag beetles can be a serious menace in marshes, cavern complexes,
and heavy forests. More than one logging camp has attracted a cluster
of giant stag beetles and had to be completely abandoned, yielding
all its lumber to the hunger of the giant insects.
GIANT STAG BEETLE CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +10; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +13
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 22; Fort +13, Ref +9, Will +8
HP 55
Speed 20 feet, fly 20 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +13, Damage 2d8+5 piercing
Melee [one-action] foot +11, Damage 1d10+5 bludgeoning
Trample[three-actions] Medium or smaller, foot, DC 21
Bestiary
42
BLOODSEEKER TREASURE
Bloodseekers have no interest in
treasure, but their lairs tend to
be scattered with the remains of
adventurers-and their valuables.
Bloodseeker
Scourges of swamps and damp, abandoned places, bloodseekers are ravenous
blood drinkers. Farmers curse the creatures for sucking their livestock dry. It
is from such beleaguered people that the bloodseeker’s regional name “stirge,”
possibly a corruption of the word “scourge,” comes. Folk wisdom holds that the
appearance of bloodseekers in a region signals a healthy herd of livestock, but
more often it means bogs or old buildings that haven’t been properly tended to.
Certainly, no amount of folksy parable can assuage a farmer driven to destitution
by a bloodseeker infestation. But despite their role as parasites, bloodseekers aren’t
hated by all villages. In some cases, the inhabitants of remote backwoods thorps
even keep the things as pets or use them as doubtful medicinal “tools” to drain
away unwanted humors or test for evil spirits possessing the blood. Worshippers
of gods of pestilence and parasites often view bloodseekers as sacred to their faith
and allow the creatures to feed freely from their bodies. In such societies, those
who accidentally give too much are considered to have been “blessed” by the
village’s hungry god.
Bloodseekers seem to be constantly hungry, but they are not inherently
malevolent. They can be scared away fairly easily and prefer to swiftly retreat
rather than risk death. Some adventurers report that these creatures can be
scared away by waving torches at the flying pests. However, bloodseekers are
much bolder when encountered in larger numbers, as bringing down one victim
lets an entire colony feed. Bloodseeker colonies are called clots, for obvious and
disgusting reasons. If a lone bloodseeker finds a likely victim while its clot is
nearby, it emits a high-pitched, keening noise to summon reinforcements.
Most humanoids avoid bloodseekers, but boggards sometimes cultivate
bloodseeker nests around the perimeter of their territory. These colonies serve
as a deterrent to intruders, and the boggards sometimes check for bloodseeker
prey, collecting the hides or bodies of animals killed by the pests. Meals prepared
from slain bloodseekers that have gorged on the blood of specific creatures are a
staple among certain boggard communities. The boggards not only eat the actual
bloodseekers, but they also make a gelled slurry from the drained blood.
A typical bloodseeker is about a foot long, with mottled, reddish-brown skin
and a yellow underbelly. Its four wings resemble bat wings. When gorged with
blood, the creature becomes bloated and pink, and it tends to wobble unsteadily
in the air as it flies off to digest its meal.
BLOODSEEKER CREATURE –1
N TINY ANIMAL
Perception +6; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Stealth +6
Str –4, Dex +3, Con +0, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 16; Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +4
HP 6
Speed 10 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] barbed leg +8 (finesse), Effect attach
Attach When a bloodseeker hits a target larger than itself, its barbed legs attach
it to that creature. This is similar to grabbing the creature, but the bloodseeker
moves with that creature rather than holding it in place. The bloodseeker is flatfooted while attached. If the bloodseeker is killed or pushed away while attached
to a creature it has drained blood from, that creature takes 1 persistent bleed
damage. Escaping the attach or removing the bloodseeker in other ways doesn’t
cause bleed damage.
Blood Drain [one-action] Requirements The bloodseeker is attached to a creature. Effect The
bloodseeker uses its proboscis to drain blood from the creature it’s attached to.
This deals 1d4 damage, and the bloodseeker gains temporary Hit Points equal to the
damage dealt. A creature that has its blood drained by a bloodseeker is drained 1 until
it receives healing (of any kind or amount).
BLOODSEEKER LOCATIONS
Bloodseekers hunt close to
their nests, which they make
in fens, bogs, fetid pools, and
abandoned buildings. A foot-wide
amalgamation of mud and reeds is
a telltale sign of a bloodseeker nest.
A-C
43
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
BOAR RESOURCES
A boar’s carcass typically provides
enough meat for 100 meals or
more, as well as hide and bristles
that can be used for crafting.
Boar
While domesticated pigs are a staple of farm life, wild boars are much more
dangerous. Foul-tempered warthogs are relatively common, while the lumbering,
primeval beasts known as daeodons are less so. Voracious eaters, boars can
ravage the countryside in which they live. Boars breed freely, and a pair of boars
can rapidly grow to a large family. Boars are a particular nuisance to farmers, as
they break into food stores and root through gardens to sate their hunger.
Boar
Boars are omnivorous mammals, hunted heavily because their meat is considered
a delicacy. Boars are most likely to attack humanoids either in self-defense or
during their mating season in the winter months, when the males grow an extra
inch of tissue to protect their organs as they fight off rivals. Of course, in some
cultures boars are trained to become much more aggressive so they can fill the
roles of warbeast and guardian. When such boars escape back into the wild, they
can become true terrors of the region.
BOAR CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +8; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +8, Survival +8
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –3
AC 18; Fort +10, Ref +5, Will +8
HP 30
Ferocity [reaction]
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] tusk +10, Damage 2d6+4 piercing
Boar Charge [two-actions] The boar Strides twice and then makes a tusk Strike. As long as it
moved at least 20 feet, it gains a +2 circumstance bonus to its attack roll.
Daeodon
Where the typical boar is merely ill-tempered and generally unfriendly, the
towering daeodon is legitimately hateful and ruthlessly violent. Although
omnivorous, the daeodon (known in some regions simply as a giant boar)
prefers to feed on flesh. Primarily a scavenger, the daeodon isn’t adverse
to attacking creatures it encounters while searching for easier meals, or
to protect any perceived encroachment into its lair or feeding grounds.
Particularly brave or skilled orcs are fond of using daeodons as
mounts or war-trained battle beasts; orc cavalry mounted on
daeodons is a fearsome force indeed.
A typical adult daeodon is 10 feet long and 7 feet tall at
the shoulder. It weighs approximately 2,000 pounds.
DAEODON CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +12; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +12, Survival +10
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +9, Will +10
HP 60
Ferocity [reaction]
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] tusk +14, Damage 2d8+6 piercing
Daeodon Charge[two-actions] The daeodon Strides twice and then makes a tusk Strike. As
long as it moved at least 20 feet, it gains a +2 circumstance bonus to its attack roll.
A Medium or smaller creature struck by this attack must succeed at a DC 19 Reflex
save or be knocked prone by the force of the blow.
BOAR LOCATIONS
Boars can be found in almost
any environment, from forests to
deserts, warm or cold, including
even high-altitude mountainous
regions. They tend to prefer
forests, marshes, and meadows.
Daeodons are likewise found
in such regions but generally
prefer remote reaches far from
civilization.
Bestiary
44
BOGGARD VILLAGES
Boggards prefer to dwell in
swamplands and mires. Though
they are at home in the water, they
prefer to spend most of their lives
on land, and build villages of mud
huts. They often keep guardian
beasts, such as bloodseekers
(page 42), crocodiles (page 67),
giant frogs, or other feral animals
tamed (if only just barely) to serve
as protectors.
Boggard
Boggards are aggressive humanoid amphibians that thrive in swamps, marshes,
and even some rain forests. Boggards hatch from eggs into tadpoles, fiercely
competing for food and even consuming their siblings in that struggle. Over 3
years, the surviving boggards develops arms, legs, and lungs while learning the
rudiments of hunting, crafts, and warfare-everything needed to survive in their
might-makes-right society. At the top of most boggard hierarchies lords a hulking
swampseer imbued with sinister divine magic.
Boggard Scout
Often tasked with patrolling the borders of their lands, boggard scouts learn to
speak another language (typically Common) to make it easier to issue threats and
insults toward trespassers.
BOGGARD SCOUT CREATURE 1
CE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS BOGGARD HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Boggard, Common
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +8, Stealth +7 (+9 in water)
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items leather armor, morningstar, sling (10 bullets)
AC 16; Fort +9, Ref +5, Will +7
HP 24
Speed 20 feet, swim 25 feet; swamp stride
Melee [one-action] morningstar +8 (versatile P), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] tongue +8 (reach 10 feet), Effect tongue grab
Ranged [one-action] sling +7 (propulsive, reload 1, range increment 50 feet), Damage 1d6+1
bludgeoning
Swamp Stride A boggard scout ignores difficult terrain caused by swamp terrain features.
Terrifying Croak [one-action] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental) The boggard scout unleashes a
terrifying croak. Any non-boggard within 30 feet becomes frightened 1 unless they
succeed at a DC 17 Will save; those who critically succeed are temporarily immune for
1 minute.
Tongue Grab If the boggard scout hits a creature with its tongue, that creature becomes
grabbed by the boggard. Unlike with a normal grab, the creature isn’t immobilized, but
it can’t move beyond the reach of the boggard’s tongue. A creature can sever the
tongue by hitting AC 13 and dealing at least 2 slashing damage. Though this doesn’t
deal any damage to the boggard, it prevents it from using its tongue Strike until it
regrows its tongue, which takes a week.
Boggard Warrior
Boggard warriors exalt in single combat, and prefer to fight alone so that
none can contest their kills. They have been known to pursue enemies who flee
combat with a single-mindedness that seems almost supernatural.
BOGGARD WARRIOR CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS BOGGARD HUMANOID
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Boggard
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +5, Stealth +6 (+8 in water)
Str +4, Dex +0, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items club, javelin (3), studded leather armor
AC 17; Fort +10, Ref +5, Will +8
HP 38
Speed 20 feet, swim 25 feet; swamp stride
Melee [one-action] club +10, Damage 1d6+6 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] tongue +10 (reach 10 feet), Effect tongue grab
A-C
45
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
GOGUNTA
Gogunta is the patron of the
boggard people, many of whom
worship her as their goddess.
Edicts sacrifice creatures by
drowning them, frolic or sing in
swamps, feed or aid amphibians
Anathema grant mercy to boggards
who worship other gods
Follower Alignments CE
DEVOTEE BENEFITS
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Intimidation
Favored Weapon whip
Domains indulgence, might,
tyranny, water
Cleric Spells 1st: jump, 3rd:
stinking cloud, 5th: black
tentacles
Ranged [one-action] javelin +6 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] club +6 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+6 bludgeoning
Swamp Stride As boggard scout.
Terrifying Croak [one-action] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental) As boggard scout, except DC 18.
Tongue Grab As boggard scout, except AC 15 and 3 HP.
Boggard Swampseer
The boggard swampseer has been gifted with magic through its worship of the
demon lord Gogunta, and uses its power to rule a boggard village, keeping the
rest of the village in line and planning raids on nearby communities.
BOGGARD SWAMPSEER CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS BOGGARD HUMANOID
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Boggard, Common
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +8, Medicine +9, Nature +11,
Performance +8, Religion +9
Str +3, Dex +0, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +3
Items staff
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +7, Will +11
HP 40
Speed 20 feet, swim 25 feet; swamp stride
Melee [one-action] staff +10 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+6 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] tongue +10 (reach 10 feet), Effect tongue grab
Primal Prepared Spells DC 21, attack +11; 2nd acid arrow, obscuring
mist; 1st fear, jump, shillelagh; Cantrips (2nd) acid splash, dancing
lights, ray of frost, tanglefoot
Destructive Croak [two-actions] (sonic) The swampseer utters a powerful
croak that deals 4d6 sonic damage to any non-boggard within
a 15-foot emanation (DC 19 basic Fortitude save); any creature
with the frightened condition takes additional sonic damage equal
to twice the value of their frightened condition. The boggard can’t use
Destructive Croak again for 1d4 rounds.
Drowning Drone [reaction] (auditory, mental) Trigger The boggard swampseer or
one of its allies within 60 feet attempts a saving throw against an auditory
or sonic effect. Effect The swampseer releases a croak that drowns out
other sound. It rolls a Performance check. It and boggard allies in the area
can use the higher result of the swampseer’s Performance check or their
saves to resolve the effects against the auditory or sonic effect.
Swamp Stride As boggard scout.
Terrifying Croak [one-action] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental) As boggard scout,
except DC 19.
Tongue Grab As boggard scout, except AC 15 and 4 HP.
Blue Dragonfly Poison
Boggards brew a potent toxin made from blue dragonflies.
Swampseers consume this mixture to awaken their divine powers, but
the poison inspires crippling hallucinations in most other creatures.
BLUE DRAGONFLY POISON ITEM 3
UNCOMMON ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 7 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activation [one-action] (Interact)
Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 30 minutes; Stage 1 dazzled (10 minutes); Stage 2 dazzled and
frightened 1 (10 minutes); Stage 3 frightened 1 and confused 1 (1 minute)
Bestiary
46
DOMINION OF THE BLACK
Brain collectors typically hunt
alone, yet some adopt morbid
cults that include followers
who hope to have their own
brains harvested by these alien
invaders. The Dominion of the
Black includes a wide array of
monstrous aliens, of which the
brain collectors are merely the
most commonly encountered on
terrestrial worlds. Many of these
aliens have affinities for stealing
thoughts, inhabiting bodies, or
feeding on memories-the focus
on the consumption of brains and
of identities suggesting disturbing
truths about their coalition.
Brain Collector
The grotesque brain collectors (or neh-thalggus, as they call themselves) originate
from worlds far beyond the known solar system, and are part of a conglomeration
of hostile aliens known collectively as the Dominion of the Black. Whether driven
by their own schemes or directives from sinister overlords, brain collectors arrive
in living starships to harvest the brains of intelligent creatures. These aberrations
draw no nutrition from brains, instead storing them for analysis and as vessels for
occult magical energies.
A brain collector’s form evokes that of a tailless scorpion, but the pulsing
brain-filled blisters that glisten along its back make them impossible to mistake
for merely oversized arachnids. Baleful eyes glare from the joints on their legs,
and the unsettling, intrusive whisper-thoughts they telepathically broadcast
into the minds of those they seek to feed on can be interpreted as threats or
promises alike.
Brain collectors have very little empathy for the denizens of any world they
visit, despite the fact that certain cults venerate them, or the Dominion they hail
from, as if they were gods. To brain collectors, terrestrial creatures are simply
resources for their magical needs and occult powers. They have little interest in
worshipping gods or being worshipped themselves, yet they do practice strange
forms of religion of their own, in which they consider the primordial forces of
deep space as worthy of faith and fear.
BRAIN COLLECTOR CREATURE 8
UNCOMMON CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Aklo, Common, Draconic, Protean, Undercommon; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +17, Arcana +18, Athletics +16, Lore (all subcategories) +18,
Occultism +21, Stealth +17
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +3
AC 26; Fort +15, Ref +13, Will +18; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 140; Immunities confused; Weaknesses brain loss
Brain Blisters A brain collector has seven brain blisters on its back that it uses to house
stolen brains. A brain collector without all seven blisters full is stupefied with a value
equal to the number of empty blisters.
Brain Loss If a brain collector takes 30 damage from a critical hit or takes
25 mental damage, it must succeed at a DC 26 save (Fortitude for critical
damage or Will for mental damage) or one of its brain blisters is destroyed.
Speed 25 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +20, Damage 2d12+6 piercing plus brain collector venom
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d8+6 slashing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 26, attack +18; 4th (2 slots)
confusion, phantasmal killer; 3rd (3 slots) dispel magic,
haste, paralyze; 2nd (4 slots) humanoid form, invisibility,
mirror image, paranoia; 1st (4 slots) mindlink, ray of
enfeeblement, true strike, unseen servant; Cantrips
(4th) dancing lights, detect magic, mage hand,
prestidigitation
Brain Collector Venom (poison); Saving Throw
DC 26 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d6 poison and enfeebled 1 (1 round);
Stage 2 1d6 poison, enfeebled 1, and slowed 1
(1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison, enfeebled 2, and
slowed 1 (1 round)
Collect Brain [one-action] (manipulate) The brain collector
collects a brain of a creature that has been dead for no
more than 1 minute. It can then use an Interact action to secure the brain in one of its
empty brain blisters.
A-C
47
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
BUGBEAR LAIRS
Bugbears live in small gangs that
often prowl together, working as a
group to sow torment. They keep
their lairs in hard-to-find places
deep in the forest or hills.
BUGBEAR TREASURE
Though bugbears don’t have much
concern for treasure, they’re prone
to keeping gruesome trophies.
Some might keep a leather cord
strung with ears from their victims,
while others collect severed fingers
or noses. Bits of valuable jewelry
can sometimes remain on these
grisly prizes.
Bugbear
These stealthy and cruel goblinoid creatures delight in spreading fear and
tormenting their victims. Bugbears are the monsters lurking in the closet and
hiding under the bed. Preying on remote farmsteads, bugbears reveal their
presence with thumps in the night or creaks of boards to build lurking dread and
arouse suspicion and fear.
Bugbear Thug
The more common bugbear thug specializes in the art of lurking in the shadows.
BUGBEAR THUG CREATURE 2
NE MEDIUM GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +7, Intimidation +4, Stealth +6
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items bastard sword, javelin (3), leather armor
AC 17; Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 34
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] bastard sword +10 (two-hand d12), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +10 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +8 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Bushwhack [one-action] The bugbear thug Strides up to 10 feet and attempts to Grapple a
creature they’re undetected by. If they succeed, they also deal fist damage to
that creature.
Mauler The bugbear thug gains a +3
circumstance bonus to damage rolls
against creatures they have grabbed.
Bugbear Tormentor
The bugbear tormentor seeks to torture their
prey as much through psychological intimidation as
through physical harm. The longer a bugbear tormentor
can keep their victim alive and terrified, the better they feel.
BUGBEAR TORMENTOR CREATURE 3
NE MEDIUM GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +8; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +9, Intimidation +7, Stealth +8, Thievery +8
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items chain shirt, dagger, sickle (2)
AC 20; Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 44
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dagger +11 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+6 piercing
Melee [one-action] sickle +11 (agile, finesse, trip), Damage 1d4+6 slashing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +10 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+6 piercing
Sneak Attack The bugbear tormentor deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flatfooted creatures.
Twin Feint [two-actions] The bugbear tormentor makes a dazzling series of attacks with
two weapons, using the first attack to throw their foe off guard against
a second attack at a different angle. They make one Strike with each of
their two melee weapons, both against the same target. The target is
automatically flat-footed against the second attack. Apply the bugbear
tormentor’s multiple attack penalty to the Strikes normally. 
Bestiary
48
BULETTE APPETITES
Although bulettes will eat almost
any living creature that they
can catch within their vicious
jaws, most of them have a
particular fondness for the flesh
of halflings or horses. Lacking
other food, a bulette might gnaw
upon vegetable matter or even
inanimate objects, although they
don’t gain actual nourishment from
doing so, this need to feed being
merely an extension of a deeply
compelling instinct.
Bulette
Bulettes are fearsome predators that roam just beneath the surface of desolate
wilderness areas. When they burrow through the ground, only the fin of their
thickly armored backs protrudes above-at least until they are ready to leap out
and strike their prey. Their appearance, appetite, and iconic dorsal fin have earned
the nickname “landshark.”
A typical bulette claims a territory of approximately 500 square miles.
When it finds an area rich in food, such as a farming village, it adds that
area to its regular patrol route. Over the course of a few months, it can wipe
entire settlements off the map. Bulettes are fiercely competitive creatures that
battle relentlessly with other predators in their territory. They actively avoid
contact or conflict with other members of their kind unless seeking a mate.
Bulette pairs share territory and mate for life-a mated pair of bulettes being
the only known exception to the creature’s penchant for solitude. They rear
their young for a short period of time. The mated pair instruct the young
bulette how to hunt, teaching their spawn which creatures are easiest to kill
and which creatures to avoid. The mated pair drive off their young after its
first successful hunt.
The first bulettes were magically created guardians, intended to serve as
frightening pets for a power-hungry and sadistic wizard. The technique for
their creation, as well as their original purpose, has since been lost to history,
and multiple conflicting accounts of ancient texts exist with dozens of wizards
claiming to have been the first inventor of the notorious beast. Some sages
postulate that the original inventor may have been an elf-a theory born out
of little more than the curious fact that bulettes, for all their ravenous nature,
seem to find elf flesh unpalatable. Unfortunately for elves who stumble into a
bulette’s path, bulettes are no less likely to kill them than any other intruder,
simply leaving the bodies unconsumed where they fall.
BULETTE CREATURE 8
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +16; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +16, Athletics +21
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 30; Fort +20, Ref +16, Will +14
HP 120
Speed 40 feet, burrow 30 feet; powerful jumper
Melee [one-action] jaws +21, Damage 2d10+10 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +21 (agile), Damage 2d8+10 slashing
Favored Prey A bulette gains a +1 circumstance
bonus to attack and damage rolls with its jaws
against a specific type of creature designated
as its favorite food. Unless otherwise stated,
a bulette’s favored prey is halflings. Elves
are never a favored prey for bulettes.
Leaping Charge [two-actions] The bulette attempts a
High Jump or Long Jump. If it’s adjacent to an
enemy at the apex of its High Jump or at the end of
its Long Jump, it can make a claw Strike against the
enemy at that moment. If the bulette jumps at least
5 feet vertically or at least 20 feet horizontally, it can
attempt two claw Strikes instead of one. The bulette’s
multiple attack penalty doesn’t increase until it
has made all the claw Strikes that are part of its
Leaping Charge.
Powerful Jumper A bulette jumps 10 feet up on a
successful High Jump, or 20 feet up on a critical success.
A-C
49
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
BUNYIP TREASURE
Bunyips have no use for treasure,
and do not actively collect it,
but the floors of their lairs are
sometimes littered with the
possessions of their humanoid
victims. A bunyip’s teeth can be
collected and sold (most bunyips
have about 50 teeth at any one
time). Alternatively, due to their
elusiveness and fabled nature, a
high-quality taxidermic bunyip
could easily command a high price
from a collector.
Bunyip
Bunyips are dangerous aquatic predators that resemble a cross between a shark
and a seal. Found in freshwater inlets or saltwater coves worldwide, bunyips
hunt where prey is plentiful, often to the consternation of coastal residents
and fisherfolk.
Despite their outlandish appearance and tendency to defend their territory with
loud, bellowing roars that echo for great distances, bunyips are very rarely sighted
by humanoids, leaving many to question their existence. For hundreds of years,
bunyips were widely regarded as nothing more than folk tales, and even now
that their existence as a species has been proven, the existence of any particular
bunyip in a local area is often met with heavy skepticism. While their limited
shapechanging abilities are no doubt a significant part of the reason for this air of
mystery, another major factor is that the aquatic creatures rarely hunt humanoids,
preferring to eat smaller animals. Most bunyips avoid human contact, except
when one wanders too close to their den or favorite hunting spot, at which point
the territorial bunyip attacks with swift and terrible ferocity. Many scholars agree
that a large number of unexplained disappearances near coastal areas are the
result of unreported bunyip aggression.
In some ports, bunyips have learned that delicious prizes can be had from the
chum and garbage discarded by fishing boats and merchant vessels. They lurk
close to the shore and carefully choose their victims, plucking them off docks and
small boats. These bunyips are particularly careful to keep their true forms
hidden, but this does little to dull rumors of monster-infested waters.
BUNYIP CREATURE 3
N MEDIUM ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +10; blood scent, darkvision, scent (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +11, Stealth +10, Survival +8
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –1
Blood Scent The bunyip can smell blood in the water from up to 1 mile away.
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +6
HP 45
Aquatic Opportunity [reaction] As Attack of Opportunity, but both the bunyip and the triggering
creature must be in water.
Speed 10 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d10+4 piercing plus 1d6 persistent bleed
Melee [one-action] tail +11 (agile), Damage 1d8+4 bludgeoning
Blood Frenzy [free-action] Requirements The bunyip is not fatigued or already in a
frenzy. Trigger The bunyip deals bleed damage to a living creature. Effect
The bunyip flies into a frenzy that lasts 1 minute. While frenzied, the
bunyip gains a +4 status bonus to damage rolls with its jaws, gains
8 temporary HP that go away at the end of the frenzy, and takes
a –2 penalty to AC.
Roar [one-action] (auditory, concentrate, emotion, enchantment, fear,
mental, primal) The bunyip lets out a loud and horrifying roar.
Other creatures within 100 feet must succeed at a DC 21 Will
save or become frightened 2 (frightened 3 on a critical failure,
frightened 1 on a success, or unaffected on a critical success).
No matter the result, the creature is temporarily immune to the
effect for 1 minute.
Shift Form [one-action] (morph, primal, transmutation) A bunyip can
alter its form slightly to gain an advantage and make it harder
to recognize. When it does, its teeth shrink and its jaws Strike
doesn’t deal the 1d6 persistent bleed damage. It can choose to gain
either a long snake tail, granting its tail Strike reach 10 feet and Grab, or
squat crocodile legs, increasing its land Speed to 20 feet. If it uses Shift Form
again, the bunyip can return to normal or switch between a long tail or crocodile legs.
Bestiary
50
CALIGNI TREASURE
Many calignis hide shiny
baubles and trinkets beneath
their dark rags, keeping them
out of sight of their greedy kin.
They also keep several doses of
black smear poison on hand to
incapacitate foes.
Caligni
Calignis lurk in subterranean cities, creeping to the surface to steal, stalk, or make
mischief. Each caligni serves in a specific role and grows into a specific form as
determined by supernatural traditions and influences in caligni society. Regardless
of their size or role, all calignis are gaunt, with pale flesh and white eyes. Some
surface dwellers call the caligni “dark folk,” a term they dislike because it doesn’t
reflect either their appearance or character, only their environment.
Caligni Dancer
Caligni dancers serve as intermediaries between caligni clans.
CALIGNI DANCER CREATURE 1
CN SMALL CALIGNI HUMANOID
Perception +6; greater darkvision, light blindness
Languages Caligni
Skills Acrobatics +7, Performance +6, Stealth +7,
Thievery +7
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +3
Items baton (light mace), dagger
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +4
HP 18, death flare
Distracting Frolic [reaction] (fortune, manipulate) Trigger
An ally within 10 feet of the dancer rolls a saving throw against
a mental or illusion effect. Effect The target ally can roll the save
twice and take the better result.
Death Flare (light) When the dancer dies, their body combusts in
a flare of white light. All creatures in a 10-foot emanation must
succeed at a DC 17 Fortitude save or be dazzled for 1d4 rounds.
Calignis that fail this save are also frightened 1. The dancer’s
gear and treasure are left in a pile where they died. As this isn’t
a magical effect, the light has no effect within magical darkness.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] baton +9 (agile, finesse, shove), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] dagger +9 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +9 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4 piercing
Occult Innate Spells DC 16; Cantrips (1st) counter performance (visual only;
Core Rulebook 386), inspire courage (Core Rulebook 386)
Dancer’s Curse [one-action] (curse, enchantment, occult, mental) The caligni dancer touches
a foe and curses it. If the target fails a DC 18 Will save, it gains clumsy 1 and
stupefied 1. The target is then temporarily immune for 24 hours. These conditions
persist until the curse is removed. The victim can attempt a new DC 18 Will save
once per hour to end the curse.
Sneak Attack The caligni dancer deals 1d6 extra precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
Caligni Creeper
The most widespread of the caligni are the mischievous caligni creepers.
CALIGNI CREEPER CREATURE 2
CN SMALL CALIGNI HUMANOID
Perception +8; greater darkvision, light blindness
Languages Caligni
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +4, Stealth +10, Thievery +8
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items black smear poison (3 doses; see page 50), dagger
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 30, death flash
A-C
51
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
THE CALIGNI LEGACY
The calignis are descendants
of humans who, millennia ago,
fled underground to escape a
devastating cataclysm and begged
malevolent, shadowy demigods
known only as the Forsaken for
salvation. The Forsaken warped the
refugees into tough survivors, but
at a price: every caligni that dies
combusts in a burst of energy that
provides a scrap of soul energy to
the Forsaken. The greatest irony
of the caligni’s bargain is that the
Forsaken themselves mysteriously
vanished long ago and no longer
answer pleas or prayers. Today,
caligni still burst into light upon
death, but their soul energy
no longer feeds a mysterious
pantheon of shadowy divinities.
Death Flash (light) When the caligni creeper dies, their body combusts in a flash of bright
light. All creatures in a 10-foot emanation must succeed at a DC 17 Fortitude save or
be blinded for 1d6 rounds. Creatures with light blindness who successfully save are
still blinded for 1 round. The creeper’s gear and treasure are left in a pile where they
died. As this isn’t a magical effect, the light has no effect within magical darkness.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dagger +10 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4 piercing plus black
smear poison (see below)
Ranged [one-action] dagger +10 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4 piercing plus black
smear poison (see below)
Occult Innate Spells DC 15; 2nd darkness (at will); Cantrips (1st) detect magic
Sneak Attack The caligni creeper deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Caligni Stalker
Caligni stalkers are often leaders of caligni enclaves.
CALIGNI STALKER CREATURE 4
CN MEDIUM CALIGNI HUMANOID
Perception +10; greater darkvision, light blindness
Languages Caligni, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +8, Stealth +13, Thievery +11
Str +2, Dex +5, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items black smear poison (6 doses; see below), leather armor, shortsword (2)
AC 21; Fort +10, Ref +13, Will +8
HP 60, death flame
Death Flame (light) When the stalker dies, their body combusts in a flash of white-hot
flame. All creatures in a 20-foot burst take 5d6 fire damage (DC 21 basic Reflex save).
The stalker’s gear and treasure are unaffected by the flames and
are left in a pile where they died.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +13 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage
1d6+7 piercing plus black smear poison (see below)
Occult Innate Spells DC 19; 2nd darkness (at will),
obscuring mist (at will); Cantrips (2nd) detect magic
Double Slice [two-actions] The caligni stalker makes two Strikes
against the same target, one with each of their
shortswords. The stalker combines the damage of
any attacks that hit and applies precision damage,
resistances, and weaknesses only once. Both
attacks count toward the stalker’s multiple
attack penalty, but the penalty increases only after both attacks.
Encircling Command [one-action] (auditory) Each caligni creeper within 30 feet of the stalker
can Step. Each creeper can benefit from Encircling Command only once per round.
Sneak Attack The caligni stalker deals 1d6 extra precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
Black Smear Poison
Many calignis use a debilitating poison crafted from subterranean
fungi.
BLACK SMEAR POISON ITEM 2
UNCOMMON ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 5 gp
Usage held, 2 hands; Bulk L
Activation[three-actions] Interact
Saving Throw DC 16 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison and
enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 2 As stage 1; Stage 3 1d6 poison, and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
Bestiary
52
Cat
Few predators of the natural world can match the cat’s talent for stalking
and stealth.
Leopard
Leopards are among the smallest of the big cats, yet they are still dangerous
creatures to tangle with. Leopard statistics can also be used for black panthers,
white-spotted snow leopards, or tawny-coated cougars.
LEOPARD CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +7, Stealth +8 (+11 in undergrowth)
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +5
HP 30
Speed 30 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (finesse), Damage 1d10+3 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile, finesse); Damage 1d6+3 slashing
Maul [one-action] The leopard makes two claw Strikes against a creature it has grabbed. Both
count toward its multiple attack penalty, but the penalty increases only after both
attacks are made.
Pounce [one-action] The leopard Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement. If the
leopard began this action hidden, it remains hidden until after this ability’s Strike.
Sneak Attack The leopard deals 1d4 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Lion
Lions are cooperative hunters, ambushing dangerous prey in groups of lionesses
that work in tandem to trap and kill their prey. Male lions are typically larger,
with long manes, and when they hunt, they tend to do so on their own.
LION CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +9; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +11, Stealth +10
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 45
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d10+6 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile); Damage 1d8+6 slashing
Pack Attack The lion deals 1d4 extra damage to any
creature that’s within reach of at least two of the
lion’s allies.
Pounce [one-action] The lion Strides and makes a Strike at the
end of that movement. If the lion began this
action hidden, it remains hidden until after
the ability’s Strike.
Sneak Attack The lion deals 1d6 extra precision
damage to flat-footed creatures.
Tiger
Tigers are solitary and territorial
hunters, using their striped hides to
blend into the forests and jungles they
call home and preferring to attack
with surprise.
DOMESTICATING BIG CATS
While it’s common practice to keep
a house cat in the home to ward
off unwanted rodents, keeping
a big cat for a pet is a different
matter entirely. Nevertheless,
up-and-coming merchant lords,
impetuous princes and princesses,
and status-obsessed nobles
have tried to do just that, often
resulting only in terrified house
staff and ruined upholstery. Many
among the idle rich will gladly pay
for the services of an unscrupulous
druid or ranger who promises to
help them achieve their dreams
of an oversized feline friend, but
the dire risks of such an endeavor
are enough to dissuade even the
greediest would-be animal trainers
from even attempting the feat.
A-C
53
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
TIGER CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +12; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +13, Stealth +13
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +11, Will +8
HP 60
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +13, Damage 1d10+7 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +13 (agile), Damage 1d8+7 slashing
Pounce [one-action] The tiger Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement. If the tiger
began this action hidden, it remains hidden until after this ability’s Strike.
Sneak Attack The tiger deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Wrestle [one-action] The tiger makes a claw Strike against a creature it is grabbing. If the attack
hits, that creature is knocked prone.
Smilodon
Smilodons are large saber-toothed cats, apex predators that are significantly more
muscular and broader than the other species of big cats. They often kill prey with
a quick stab to the throat or other vulnerable spot. The smilodon’s oversized fangs
are particularly sought after as trophies.
SMILODON CREATURE 6
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +14; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +16, Stealth +12
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 23; Fort +15, Ref +12, Will +10
HP 110
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +16, Damage
2d10+6 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile),
Damage 2d8+6 slashing plus
Grab
Pierce Armor [one-action] The smilodon
makes a fangs Strike against
a creature it is grabbing. If the
attack hits, the creature is knocked
prone; if the creature is wearing
armor with hardness 10 or lower, the armor is
broken. If this Strike breaks a creature’s armor
or damages a creature who is unarmored or
wearing broken armor, the creature also
takes 2d6 persistent bleed damage. This
Strike doesn’t further damage armor
that’s already broken.
Pounce [one-action] The smilodon Strides and
makes a Strike at the end of that
movement. If the smilodon began
this action hidden, it remains
hidden until after this
ability’s Strike.
Sneak Attack The smilodon
deals 1d6 extra precision
damage to creatures that are
flat-footed.
CAT LOCATIONS
Leopards are exceptionally
adaptable, able to survive in any
grassland, forest, or jungle, and
even the fringes of deserts.
Lions live in grassy plains
and savannas, although species
adapted for temperate environs
that dwell in mountains exist as
well. Male mountain lions lack
the mane of their somewhat
larger grassland-dwelling kin,
but are no less dangerous.
While tigers are most common
in forests, they also inhabit
grasslands and savannas as long
as vegetation is dense, and their
dens are often found in caves.
Smilodons live in wooded
and grassland areas.
Bestiary
54
Catfolk
Lithe and agile, with catlike features and long tails, the amurruns are wanderers,
explorers, and extroverts who share a gregarious nature and an unbridled
curiosity. This latter characteristic leads many individual amurruns into trouble,
yet this inquisitiveness is paired with a penchant for good fortune that offsets
much of their self-induced peril. They accept the term “catfolk” as a name for
their people with grace and a hint of amusement.
Ever eager to explore and learn, catfolk have spread to other parts of the world
from their native nations in the southern tropics, yet never in large groups. A lone
catfolk can be found anywhere in the world, but it’s rare to find a settlement beyond
their traditional national borders. This is due to their innate wanderlust and insatiable
wonder. As many a catfolk might say, “I’ve lived with my people my whole life, but
you? You’re new and different! There’s so much to learn from you!”
Longstanding amurrun legends claim the catfolk were first created as guardians
and were then charged with protecting the world from those sinister forces
that exist at its fringes. Often, this charge manifests as a longstanding
opposition to cultists of demon lords, archdevils, and other
fiendish demigods. Many catfolk worship the spirits
of creation, using serendipitous rituals to attract
good fortune and banish ill luck in the spirits’
name, while others venerate their own
small pantheon of divinities. Those who
travel often find comfort in the worship
of Desna, whose teachings closely match
their own predilections.
Catfolk adapt well to adventuring roles,
and can be quite diverse in their areas
of study and specialization. Those who
follow the traditions of rangers and rogues are
perhaps the most commonly encountered, but not
overwhelmingly so. Their natural curiosity leads some
catfolk to take up mystical arts, training as wizards or following
a divine path to become clerics.
catfolk pouncer
Catfolk pouncers travel the world in search of new experiences.
CATFOLK POUNCER CREATURE 1
CG MEDIUM CATFOLK HUMANOID
Perception +6; low-light vision
Languages Amurrun, Common
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +6, Nature +4, Stealth +7, Survival +4
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items greataxe, leather armor, spear (3)
AC 17; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +4
HP 19
Cat’s Luck [reaction] (fortune) Trigger The catfolk pouncer fails or
critically fails a Reflex saving throw. Frequency Once per day. Effect Reroll
that saving throw and take the better result.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] greataxe +8 (sweep), Damage 1d12+3 slashing
Melee [one-action] dagger +9 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +9 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4
+3 piercing
Sudden Charge [two-actions] The catfolk pouncer Strides up to double their
Speed. If the catfolk ends their movement within melee reach of at
least one enemy, they can make a melee Strike against that enemy.
THE CATFOLK NATION
Catfolk claim to hail from a faroff nation called Murraseth in
southern Garund. It is a nation
rumored to hold a dark secret at
its center, the details of which
its discreet inhabitants do not
willingly divulge to outsiders.
Indeed, few adventurers from the
Inner Sea region have managed
to gain entrance to Murraseth, let
alone discover any of its mysteries.
A-C
55
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Cauthooj
These large, flightless birds are deceptively agile, considering their long bodies and
awkward, hopping gait. Solitary predators, they use their hypnotic warbling song
to drive prey into a wild frenzy, manipulating them into attacking one another so
that the cauthooj can then feast on the remains.
Known to some scholars as the puppet master bird, and to others as the shrill
shrike, cauthoojs are widely reviled by most intelligent humanoids, in part because
the birds seem to prefer humanoids to other prey. Cauthooj sightings typically
lead to the creation of hunting parties to track the creature down before it can kill
again, with would-be hunters typically stuffing their ears full of wax in an effort
to avoid being affected by its cry. Those who have survived the creature’s song
report that the experience is uniquely unnerving, and almost all accounts agree
that there is no other sound as terrible.
While one might assume the cauthooj is a dumb animal, these creatures are in fact
quite a bit smarter than they look. Cauthoojs stalk the perimeter of remote settlements
in hopes of finding a lone traveler they can feast upon. These patient creatures will wait
in ambush as long as they must to sate their hunger. They
can even understand a few rudimentary words in Sylvan,
although they are incapable of clearly speaking themselves.
This doesn’t stop the cauthooj from attempting to mimic
the sounds it hears, but when it does so, its eerie primal
nature enhances the attempt, leading to the bird’s signature ability
to manipulate minds and encourage conflict, a trait the cauthooj is just
barely smart enough to understand-and enjoy.
CAUTHOOJ CREATURE 12
N MEDIUM BEAST
Perception +22; thoughtsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Sylvan (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +24, Stealth +25
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +7, Int –3, Wis +2, Cha +0
Thoughtsense (divination, mental, occult) The cauthooj senses a
creatures mental essence at the listed ranged.
AC 33; Fort +25, Ref +20, Will +18
HP 215; Resistances sonic 15
Hop-Dodge [reaction] (move) Trigger The cauthooj is the target of a melee
Strike and is adjacent to another enemy that is also within the
reach of the melee Strike. Effect The cauthooj nimbly hops aside,
redirecting the triggering Strike against the adjacent enemy. The
cauthooj Strides up to half its Speed, and this movement does not trigger reactions.
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +26 (agile, deadly 1d12, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+12 piercing
Staccato Strike [one-action] (mental, primal, sonic) With subtle alterations in the pitch and tone
of its song, the cauthooj directs one creature confused by its Warbling Song to make
a Strike. This works like other Strikes made by confused creatures, except that the
cauthooj chooses the target. If no target is in reach or range, or the creature is
unable to Strike for any other reason, this ability has no effect.
Warbling Song [two-actions] (auditory, incapacitation, mental, primal) The cauthooj gives a
strange, ululating cry that causes nearby creatures to lash out violently and without
control. Each creature within a 120-foot emanation that can hear the cauthooj must
attempt a DC 32 Will save to resist the effect.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and is temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is confused for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target is confused for 1 round and immediately attacks itself (in
the normal fashion for attacking oneself while confused). This Strike doesn’t give
the creature a flat check to recover from the confusion.
CAUTHOOJ TREASURE
Like magpies, cauthoojs are
attracted to shiny baubles, and
they often pick up choice treasures
from their victims, depositing
these trinkets in large piles in their
lairs. Not all that glitters is gold,
however, and adventurers will find
as many colorful bits of string,
broken mirror shards, and pieces
of costume jewelry as they find
coins, magic weapons, and other
valuable treasures.
CAUTHOOJ LOCATIONS
Cauthoojs make their lairs in
small caverns, alcoves, and similar
out-of-the-way places, but claim
large stretches of territory and
wander many miles from their lairs
in search of food. They often hunt
in plains, prairies, and other large,
open expanses.
A-C
57

56
Cave Worm
Cave worms are gigantic scavengers that bore through the depths of the world,
eating whatever material they find. Named for their distinctive colorations, these
worms are ravenous and display overwhelming destructive capabilities. Cave worms
of different colors and abilities lurk in the more remote corners of the world-tales
speak of white worms that dwell within immense glaciers or icebergs and gray
worms that burrow through the boneyards of long-forgotten ruins, to name a few.
Purple Worm
The purple worm is the most common and infamous of the cave worms, a
much-feared monster wandering the twisting tunnels of the Darklands that is capable
of carving out entire cave systems. Tunnels bored by a purple worm don’t always last
long after these creature’s passage, and areas where they nest are maddening mazes
of passageways that lead nowhere, yet navigating the labyrinth to find the worm’s
central nest often yields amazing treasures left behind by the worm’s prior victims.
PURPLE WORM CREATURE 13
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +20; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +30
Str +9, Dex –1, Con +7, Int –5, Wis –1, Cha –1
BELLY OF THE BEAST
The adventure need not end simply
because the party was ingloriously
swallowed whole by a giant cave
worm. Perhaps the PCs find an
undigested item that helps them
survive the inhospitable environ,
or maybe the worm regurgitates
them in a cavern far off from
where they started. Whatever
the specifics, you can easily draw
from folklore and popular fiction
to create your own "belly of the
worm" adventure for heroes who
wind up on the wrong side of the
monster’s scales. 
A-C
57

56
RAVENOUS TUNNELERS
Cave worms are infamous for
being nearly unstoppable and for
swallowing their prey whole. A
cave worm also ingests earth and
minerals as it tunnels. The worm
processes some of these minerals,
resulting in its armored hide and
toxic sting, while it leaves others
behind-often including treasure or
other valuables that incidentally
serve to lure explorers into the
worm’s proximity and, more often
than not, its gullet. While not
completely mindless, cave worms
are difficult to train, and most
attempts to domesticate them (in
theory, a cave worm would make
an excellent mining resource)
result in disaster.
AC 32; Fort +28, Ref +21, Will +21
HP 270
Inexorable The purple worm recovers from the paralyzed, slowed, and stunned
conditions at the end of its turn. It’s also immune to penalties to its Speeds and the
immobilized condition, and it ignores difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain.
Shake It Off [reaction] Frequency once per day; Trigger The purple worm would be affected
by a condition or adverse effect (such as baleful polymorph). Effect The purple
worm negates the triggering condition or effect. Effects from artifacts, deities, or a
similarly powerful source can’t be avoided in this way.
Speed 40 feet, burrow 40 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +28 (deadly 2d10, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+15 piercing plus
Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +28 (agile, poison, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+15 piercing plus purple
worm venom
Melee [one-action] body +26 (reach 15 feet), Damage 1d10+13 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] regurgitate +26 (brutal, range increment 60 feet), Damage varies (see ability)
Fast Swallow [reaction] Trigger The purple worm Grabs a creature. Effect The worm uses
Swallow Whole.
Purple Worm Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 32 Fortitude, Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 5d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round), Stage 2 6d6 poison damage, and
enfeebled 2 (1 round); Stage 3 8d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
Regurgitate The purple worm can violently regurgitate a creature or boulder it has
swallowed to make a ranged Strike. The Strike deals bludgeoning damage depending
on the size of the projectile: Tiny deals 2d6+13, Small 3d6+13, Medium 4d6+13,
Large 5d6+13, and Huge 6d6+13. A regurgitated creature takes falling damage from
the height of the target or from 20 feet, whichever is greater.
Boulders occupy space in the worm’s stomach as a creature of equivalent size, and
purple worms often have several boulders swallowed. A purple worm can use a single
action to swallow a new boulder.
Rock Tunneler A purple worm can burrow through solid stone at a Speed of 20 feet. It
can leave a tunnel if it desires, and it usually does.
Swallow Whole [one-action] Huge, 3d6+9 bludgeoning, Rupture 24
Thrash [two-actions] The worm makes a Strike once against each creature in its reach. It can
Strike up to once with its jaws, up to once with its stinger, and any number of times
with its body. Each attack counts toward the worm’s multiple attack penalty, but the
multiple attack penalty doesn’t increase until after it makes all the attacks.
Azure Worm
The azure worm is a deep-blue creature that is more at home in flooded tunnels
than dry caves. While an azure worm is a strong swimmer, it prefers to lie in
wait within the walls, floor, or even ceiling of flooded caverns, ready to spring
out and ambush creatures swimming past its hiding spot. The azure worm is
particularly hated and feared by Darklands-dwelling cultures, due to the fact
that an azure worm that burrows into a tunnel often brings with it waters from
the submerged river or lake it calls home. When it becomes obvious that an
azure worm is near a Darklands settlement, the inhabitants quickly establishing
a hunting party to deal with the menace before it can bring ruin.
AZURE WORM CREATURE 15
UNCOMMON N GARGANTUAN AMPHIBIOUS ANIMAL
Perception +22; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +33, Stealth +20 (+25 in water)
Str +10, Dex –1, Con +8, Int –5, Wis –1, Cha –1
AC 35; Fort +32, Ref +20, Will +23
HP 320
Inexorable As purple worm.
Shake It Off [reaction] As purple worm.
A-C
59

58
Speed 40 feet, burrow 40 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +31 (deadly 2d10, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d12+16 piercing
plus Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +31 (agile, poison, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d6+16 piercing plus azure
worm venom
Melee [one-action] body +29 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+14 bludgeoning
Azure Worm Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 37 Fortitude, Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 3d6 poison damage and clumsy 2 (1 round); Stage 2 4d6 poison
damage and clumsy 2 (1 round); Stage 3 6d6 poison damage and clumsy 2 (1 round)
Breach [two-actions] The azure worm Swims up to its swim Speed, then Leaps vertically out of
the water up to 30 feet, making a Strike against a creature at the apex of the jump
(this lets it attack a creature within 45 feet of the water’s surface). After the Strike,
the worm splashes back down. It can use Improved Grab on this Strike and follow it
up with Fast Swallow.
Fast Swallow [reaction] Trigger The worm Grabs a creature. Effect The worm uses Swallow Whole.
Swallow Whole [one-action] Huge, 3d8+10 bludgeoning, Rupture 27
Thrash[two-actions] As purple worm.
Crimson Worm
Among the most dangerous cave worms are the fiery crimson worms. In addition
to being even larger than azure or purple worms, the crimson worm has a penchant
for burrowing through volcanic regions that, over the generations, have infused
it with a supernatural link to the Elemental Plane of Fire. The molten heart of an
active volcano is an attractive lair for a crimson worm, as are the sprawling fields
of bubbling magma found in the deepest reaches of the Darklands. Legends from
ancient peoples, precursor dwarven societies, and colonists of the Elemental
Planes populated moats of lava with crimson worms likely have some basis in
truth, although the methods such ancients used to keep these “moat worms”
contained and prevented them from chewing their way through fortress
foundations must have been significant.
Crimson worms sometimes frequent areas on the surface where volcanism
creates hot springs or other geothermal features, but even then they prefer
to spend most of their time burrowing through the ground in their never-ending
search for sustenance. Surface lands claimed by crimson worms are notable for
the mound-shaped burrows these creatures leave behind as they dig.
NOTORIOUS WORMS
Some societies view the immense
cave worms as natural disasters
or incarnations of wrathful gods.
Cave worms that have been active
in a region often become part of
that area’s local lore. For example,
in the notorious Cinderlands of
eastern Varisia, Shoanti have
long told tales of Cindermaw, an
immense crimson worm viewed
by some as worthy of worship,
and by others as the ultimate test
of bravery. 
A-C
59

58
CRIMSON WORM CREATURE 18
RARE N GARGANTUAN BEAST FIRE
Perception +25; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +38
Str +10, Dex –1, Con +9, Int –3, Wis –1, Cha –1
AC 40; Fort +36, Ref +25, Will +27
HP 410; fire healing; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 15
Fire Healing As long as a crimson worm is in contact with a fire or body of magma at
least as large as itself, it gains fast healing 20. When struck by a magical fire effect
from anything other than itself, a crimson worm regains Hit Points equal to half the
fire damage the effect would otherwise deal.
Inexorable As purple worm.
Shake It Off [reaction] As purple worm.
Speed 40 feet, burrow 40 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +36 (deadly 3d10, fire, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+18 piercing plus 2d6
fire and Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +36 (agile, fire, poison, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+18 piercing plus
2d6 fire and crimson worm venom
Melee [one-action] body +34 (fire, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+16 bludgeoning plus 2d6 fire
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The crimson worm breathes a blast of
flame in a 60-foot cone that deals 18d6 fire damage to all creatures in the area (DC 41
basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Crimson Worm Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 41 Fortitude, Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and drained 1 (1 round), Stage 2 2d6 poison
damage and drained 1 (1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison damage and drained 2 (1 round).
Fast Swallow [reaction] Trigger The worm Grabs a creature. Effect The worm uses
Swallow Whole.
Rock Tunneler As purple worm.
Swallow Whole [one-action] Huge, 3d10+10 bludgeoning plus 2d6 fire,
Rupture 36
Thrash[two-actions] As purple worm.
CAVE WORM GUARDIANS
Cave worms are notoriously dim
witted, driven primarily by purely
animalistic needs to feed and
reproduce. This hasn’t prevented
attempts to use them as guardians
for their lairs, if not to tame them.
Magic can be used to maintain
control over a worm, but gifted,
patient, and brave animal trainers
can condition cave worms to
serve in all manner of roles, such
as living siege engines, shocking
methods of executing foes, or
merely pets.
A-C
61

60
CENTAUR TREASURE
Centaurs appreciate fine weapons
and armor. Some craft their own
while others use quality armaments
they take from their enemies;
however, due to their forms, they
are unlikely to use armor heavier
than breastplates.
Centaur
Centaurs are legendary hunters and trackers who resemble heavily muscled
humans with the bodies of powerful horses from the waist down. They are
typically reclusive but haughty, quick to assume that their handsome physiques
and long history of cultural traditions make them superior to any two-legged
folk they encounter. While stories of bloody clashes between centaurs and
humanoid settlers are well known, centaurs are neither intrinsically bloodthirsty
nor recklessly aggressive. Rather, they are proud and stubborn and do not take
kindly to outsiders who encroach on their ancestral grounds, some of which
have been ruled by centaurs for thousands of years. Against despoilers of nature
who fail to heed their warnings, centaurs do not hesitate to use their finely
honed hunting skills to inflict deadly wounds.
Centaurs train with weapons as well as their heavy hooves, and the thunder of
centaurs charging across the plains is often mistaken for a stampede or even an
earthquake. Despite their insular nature, some centaurs form close alliances
with elves, fey, gnomes, and isolated human communities. Such
allies are often surprised to learn the depths of centaurs’ honor,
pragmatism, and wilderness lore. Rarely, a centaur leaves its tribe
to travel the wider world. Such lone centaur wanderers more easily
integrate into humanoid societies, but other centaurs are
quick to assume that some dishonor led to their exile and
thus give such vagabonds a wide berth.
Centaurs have incredible variation in their individual
size and coloration. Their upper bodies are fairly
similar within a tribe and even region, but their lower
bodies-like those of horses-can vary widely from
parent to child. Most centaurs are at least 7 feet tall
and weigh more than 2,000 pounds.
Centaurs live in groups of dozens of members,
usually led by an old, powerful seer or battlehardened warrior who has carried out many noble
deeds and earned a lifetime of respect from their
comrades. The revered leader guides the habits of
their entire group; a wise seer might encourage the
tribe to roam far from civilization to preserve the
ways of its ancestors, while an aggressive warrior
might foster skirmishes with nearby humanoid
settlements and even rival centaur groups.
CENTAUR CREATURE 3
N LARGE BEAST
Perception +9; darkvision
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Athletics +11, Diplomacy +6, Intimidation +6, Nature +7,
Survival +7
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items breastplate, longsword, spear (3), steel shield (Hardness 5,
HP 20, BT 10)
AC 20 (22 with shield raised), Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +9
HP 40
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +9 (agile), Damage 1d10+4 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] longsword +11 (versatile P), Damage 1d8+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] spear +11, Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] spear +9 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Trample [three-actions] Medium or smaller, hoof, DC 18
A-C
61

60
CENTIPEDE SPECIES
Centipedes take nearly countless
forms amid nearly every climate,
with specific traits and abilities
varying wildly between species.
Tangled forests, arid deserts,
foul sewers, deep caverns, and
abandoned buildings are all
common haunts for centipedes,
from oversized specimens capable
of taking down significant prey
alone to carpets of frenzied vermin
gathered into a dangerous swarm.
Larger and more specialized
centipedes than the two presented
here exist, such as the sleek giant
whiptail centipede or the immense
titan centipede.
Centipede
Hunters and scavengers that live amid dung and detritus, centipedes are a
relatively common and often reviled threat faced by adventurers. Scurrying about
with surprising speed on the scores of legs attached to their long, segmented
bodies, centipedes strike with poisoned mandibles to slow and torment their prey
with a vicious toxin before they settle down to feed in slow and disgusting leisure.
Giant Centipede
Most giant centipedes (known as sewer centipedes when found in cities) nest in
small groups but hunt alone when they seek out food. Attempts to domesticate
giant centipedes for use as guardians or pets generally end poorly, but some
tribes of goblins, kobolds, and mitflits have developed effective methods of
utilizing these vermin as guardians. Other tribes and some humanoid societies
roast and eat centipedes, often with pungent peppers as a savory delicacy,
although care must be taken in preparing the meal to avoid tainting the flesh
with the creature’s venom.
GIANT CENTIPEDE CREATURE –1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +6; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +2, Stealth +6
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha –4
AC 15; Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +2
HP 8
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +6 (finesse), Damage 1d4–1 piercing plus giant
centipede venom
Giant Centipede Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 14 Fortitude;
Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage (1
round); Stage 2 1d8 poison damage and flat-footed (1 round) Stage 3
1d12 poison damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round)
Centipede Swarm
Swarms of centipedes are dangerous indeed, ravenous carpets of skittering
hunger capable of devouring a traveler whole in a matter of minutes. Some
alchemists submerge whole centipedes taken from swarms in their elixirs and
some mutagens, claiming such infusions increase potency, though other say this
is nothing more than quackish claptrap. Kobolds and mitflits are both known
to incorporate swarms of centipedes into cunning traps, from simple pits filled
with vermin or more complex affairs involving chutes that dump the vermin
onto the heads of unwary intruders.
CENTIPEDE SWARM CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +9; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +7, Stealth +9
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –4
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +5
HP 30; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses
area damage 5, splash damage 5; Resistances bludgeoning 5,
piercing 5, slashing 2
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Centipede Swarm Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 20 Fortitude;
Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and flat-footed
(1 round); Stage 2 1d8 poison damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round)
Swarming Bites [one-action] Each enemy in the swarm’s space takes 1d8 piercing
damage (DC 20 basic Reflex save) plus centipede swarm venom.
A-C
63

62
CHANGELING EXILES
Changelings who resist the Call and
abandon the society that raised
them become exiles like the one
presented on this page-creatures
who live solitary lives in the wild
and are often driven to desperate
measures to survive, taking up the
lifestyles of highway bandits or
risk-taking wilderness guides.
Changeling
Children of hags, destined to become hags themselves, changelings face a life of conflict.
Born of supernatural creatures who kill and consume the child’s father, changelings are
deposited into their father’s society to be raised. These offspring appear to be members
of their paternal ancestry, and changelings have been found among dwarves, gnomes,
orcs, goblins, and numerous others, but human-ancestry changelings are by far the
most common. Within the normal range for their ancestry, changelings tend toward
slighter builds, darker hair, and pale complexions, though their
most common feature is a nearly universal heterochromia,
leading to widespread superstition about individuals with
differently colored eyes.
As changelings come of age, they sometimes manifest
abilities granted by their hag heritage. Some gain the
ability to see in the dark, some grow fingernails long and
hard enough to serve as claws, and others gain even stranger
abilities specific to their hag mother. For instance, dream mays,
the children of night hags or their cousins the dreamthief hags,
can gain an enhanced ability to resist the magic of dreams and
sleep. Other types of changelings include slag mays, the children
of annis hags; callow mays, the children of green hags; brine
mays, the children of sea hags; and others for each type of hag.
As beings infused with supernatural power, changelings find
themselves able to command various traditions of magic, with
many drawn to either the occult magic common among hags or
primal magic.
At roughly the same time in their lives, many changelings-
women in particular-begin to hear the Call, a psychic urging from
their hag mother luring them away from the communities that raised
them. If followed, the Call eventually leads the changeling to the hag’s
coven, where they are subjected to terrible rituals that twist them
into hags themselves. Some changelings, especially those who have
strong social bonds or embrace druidic traditions, are able to resist
this Call and continue on with their mortal lives. The fact that the Call
disproportionately targets female changelings has led to a widespread
misunderstanding that all changelings are female, while in fact male
changelings are simply assumed to be members of their paternal ancestry.
Changeling exile
This changeling exile is the child of a night hag or dreamthief hag.
CHANGELING EXILE CREATURE 3
CN MEDIUM CHANGELING HUMAN HUMANOID
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Common, Druidic
Skills Deception +9, Medicine +9, Nature +11, Stealth +8, Survival +9
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items leather armor, staff
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +11; +2 circumstance to all saves vs. dream and sleep
HP 45
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claws +11 (agile), Damage 1d4+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] staff +11 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Primal Prepared Spells DC 21, attack +11; 2nd darkness, humanoid form, 1st
burning hands, shillelagh, ventriloquism; Cantrips (2nd) dancing lights, produce
flame, read aura, tanglefoot
Druid Order Spells DC 21; 2nd (1 Focus Point) wild morph,
wild shape
A-C
63

62
KOBOLD ADORATION
Some kobold groups are fond of
chimera guardians or pets, but
few kobolds have the bravery or
resources to keep a chimera happy
for long. While chimeras are often
pressed into service by more
intelligent creatures, it’s also not
unheard of for a chimera to keep
a herd of unintelligent animals-
lions, goats, or even serpents-as
both companions and food supply.
Chimera
The chimera is the archetypal example of an unnatural monster made up of a
monstrous mix of wildly different component creatures: in this case, a lion, a
dragon, and a goat. Wild, hateful, and hungry, it tries to eat any creature it sees,
but sometimes a strong-willed master is able to compel a chimera to serve as a
guardian or even a mount.
CHIMERA CREATURE 8
UNCOMMON CE LARGE BEAST
Perception +16; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +18, Stealth +18
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –3, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 27; Fort +18, Ref +16, Will +14
HP 135
Three Headed Any ability that would sever a chimera’s head (such as a critical hit with
a vorpal weapon) severs one head at random. Losing a head doesn’t kill a chimera (as
long as it has one head left), but it does prevent it from making Strikes with the lost
head or using the head’s Breath Weapon.
Triple Opportunity A chimera gains 2 extra reactions each round
that it can use only to make Attacks of Opportunity. It
must use a different head for each reaction, and it
can’t use more than one on the same triggering
action. If it loses one of its heads, it also loses
one of these extra reactions.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] dragon jaws +20, Damage 2d6+9
piercing plus 2d6 energy damage (see
draconic bite)
Melee [one-action] lion jaws +20, Damage
2d10+9 piercing
Melee [one-action] goat horns +20, Damage
2d10+9 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d6+9 slashing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, evocation) The chimera breathes a
cone or line that deals 9d6 damage to all creatures in the
area (DC 26 basic save of a type indicated below).
The color of the chimera’s dragon head
determines the area of the Breath
Weapon, the type of damage it deals,
and the type of save to avoid it. The
chimera can’t use Breath Weapon again
for 1d4 rounds.
• Black 60-foot line of acid (Reflex)
• Blue 60-foot line of electricity (Reflex)
• Green 30-foot cone of poison (Fortitude)
• Red 30-foot cone of fire (Reflex)
• White 30-foot cone of cold (Reflex)
Draconic Bite A chimera’s dragon head deals an extra 2d6 damage of a
type matching the dragon’s color (see Breath Weapon).
Three-Headed Strike [two-actions] The chimera makes a Strike with its
dragon jaws, lion jaws, and goat horns, each at a –2 penalty
and targeting a different creature. These Strikes count as
only one attack for the chimera’s multiple attack penalty,
and the penalty doesn’t increase until after it has made all
three attacks.
A-C
65

64
CHUUL TREASURE
While chuuls are uninterested
in money, gems, tools, or magic
of any kind, they have a nearly
compulsive need to collect trophies
of their victories, perchance to
savor the memories of the kill and
the meat. What treasure they have
are typically such mementos.
Chuul
Also known as chu’ulothis, these large, armor-plated, crustacean predators lurk
beneath the surface of pools, mires, and ponds, waiting to snatch up prey with
their massive claws before paralyzing them with their tentacles. At that point,
they begin to feed, eating their quarry alive.
Chuuls can live in fresh or saltwater, and indeed are found in aquatic environs
the world over-even in the subterranean oceans and lakes of the Darklands.
While chuuls are good swimmers, they prefer terrestrial prey. Their preferred
method of hunting is by lunging out of the water, paralyzing their victims with
their poison-coated tentacles, then gleefully dragging their twitching food into the
water to drown if they cannot simply eat such morsels alive. Chuuls that dwell
aboveground prefer to dine on lizardfolk, while those swimming the subterranean
lakes of the Darklands readily eat anything but xulgaths, whose flavor and stink
they find off-putting.
Chuuls are capable of speech and reason, but these creatures rarely speak with
those outside their species except to taunt their food. Before it begins consuming
its prey, a chuul often speaks in a gurgling, nearly incomprehensible dialect about
how it will enjoy feasting on the creature’s flesh. Perhaps chuuls believe that
insults and degradation lead to more tender and tastier food, but the truth will
likely never be known; almost all chuuls stubbornly refuse any
meaningful conversation, even when imprisoned and compelled
by treats or pain.
It is unknown if a chuul society exists beyond their frenzied
mating season. Chuuls’ intellects seem devoted only toward eating,
causing psychological pain to sentient creatures, decorating their
lairs with mementos of their favorite meals and
victories, and breeding.
CHUUL CREATURE 7
CE LARGE ABERRATION AMPHIBIOUS
Perception +15; darkvision, tremorsense
(imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Aklo, Common (or Undercommon,
for Darklands variants)
Skills Athletics +17, Nature +13, Stealth +14,
Survival +13
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 28; Fort +18, Ref +15, Will +12
HP 100; Immunities poison
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 30 feet; swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claws +19 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+9 bludgeoning plus Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+9 bludgeoning, DC 25 (grabbed by claws only)
Mandibles [one-action] Requirement A creature is grabbed and paralyzed
by the chuul’s tentacles. Effect The creature takes 3d6
piercing damage.
Paralytic Venom (incapacitation, poison) Saving Throw
DC 25 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1
paralyzed (1 round).
Tentacle Transfer [one-action] Requirement The chuul has a
creature grabbed. Effect The chuul transfers the
grabbed creature from its claws to its tentacles,
or vice versa. A creature is exposed to the
chuul’s paralytic venom when transferred into
the tentacles and at the start of each of the
chuul’s turns if it remains grabbed by
the tentacles.
A-C
65

64
CLOAKER ALLIES
On the rare occasions that cloakers
associate with other creatures, they
tend to ally with those ulat-kinis
(page 12) who are no longer the
thralls of the alghollthus and,
rarely, with deros (pages 84–85),
though they consider the latter
irrational and untrustworthy.
Cloakers never willingly associate
with alghollthus.
CLOAKER LOCATIONS
Cloakers isolate themselves within
the deeper parts of the Darklands
and are concentrated in Sekamina
and Orv. They tend to avoid Nar-Voth
due to its proximity to the surface.
Cloaker
Weird and paranoid creatures that dwell in the Darklands, cloakers resemble
hideous, flying manta rays. Crafty and careful hunters, their motivations, their
patterns of attack, and even their societies and history are often an inscrutable
jumble of contradicting reports, confused rumors, and terrifying accounts.
Like many of the stranger creatures of Golarion, cloakers were originally created
by the alghollthus, who bred them to spy on their Azlanti thralls. Upon the fall of
the Azlanti empire, the alghollthus cast out their cloaker creations, who, in turn,
fled to the lower reaches of the Darklands. Amid the vaults and twisted corridors of
their new home, their attitudes-particularly regarding their apprehension toward
their former masters-changed dramatically. Suspicion became paranoia, egotism,
sadism, and much worse. Now, most cloakers lead solitary lives, stalking the
Darklands for easy prey and delving deeper into internal horrors. Their paranoia
is so great that they interact only rarely even with their own kind, encountering
another cloaker only briefly to mate before flitting back to isolation.
But there are exceptions. Every so often, a charismatic cloaker priest can call
together a dark cabal of these creatures and other Darklands denizens to worship
unspeakable ancient gods. These rare cloakers whip their acolytes and followers
into a frenzy of dark rituals and heinous acts. While these cults are depraved and
destructive, they rarely survive longer than their founder.
CLOAKER CREATURE 5
CN LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Undercommon
Skills Deception +14 (+16 to Impersonate a cloak, sheet, or ray), Religion +12,
Stealth +14
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +1
Shadow Shift Cloakers are concealed in dim light even to creatures with low-light vision
and darkvision.
AC 22; Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 80
Speed 10 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +14, Damage 1d10+7 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +14 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+7 slashing
Envelop [one-action] (attack, incapacitation) The cloaker makes an attack roll with
a +14 bonus against an adjacent creature’s Reflex DC. If it succeeds, it
envelops the target, who is restrained. Attacks that hit an enveloping
cloaker deal half their damage to the cloaker and half to the trapped
victim. The cloaker can’t Fly, and when it moves using its land
Speed it moves the enveloped creature with it. The cloaker can
make only jaws Strikes against the restrained creature but can
make tail Strikes against other creatures.
A creature that voluntarily puts on the cloaker becomes
engulfed automatically. A cloaker can engulf only Large or
smaller creatures, and no more than one creature at a time.
Infrasonic Moan [two-actions] (auditory, emotion, mental) The cloaker
lets out an infrasonic moan that has one of the effects below.
A creature that succeeds at a DC 22 Will save is unaffected. Any
creature that attempts this save becomes temporarily immune for 1
hour. Because the moan is infrasonic, most humanoids don’t detect the source of
their plight if they aren’t already aware of the cloaker.
• Fear (fear, incapacitation) Each creature within a 30-foot emanation becomes frightened
1 (or, on a critical failure, frightened 2 and fleeing until the end of its next turn).
• Nausea Each creature within a 30-foot emanation falls prone and become sickened 2.
• Stupor The cloaker targets a single creature within 30 feet. The creature becomes
clumsy 1 and stupefied 1 for 1 minute. 
A-C
67

66
COCKATRICE TREASURE
Cockatrice lairs sometimes include
discarded gear from past victims
or smooth, pretty stones disgorged
from the creature’s craw. Gem
workers especially prize precious
stones that have been polished to
perfection in a cockatrice’s crop,
and may pay a high price for these
so-called "cockatrice rocks." Soft
materials suitable for nesting, such
as cloth and leather, rarely survive
a cockatrice’s attentions, but metal
goods are often left in fine working
order, since cockatrices seem to
have little interest in anything
shiny they can’t fit in their gullet.
Cockatrice
Ugly and aggressive, the dread cockatrice stalks garbage pits and hillside dumps in
search of prey that it can turn to stone with its petrifying beak and subsequently
consume piece by broken piece. Cockatrices resemble gaunt and sickly roosters
with bat wings and serpentine tails, and they rarely grow more than 2 feet tall
and twice as long. Their absentminded clucking gives smart prey ample warning
of their presence, and when angered cockatrices let out a shrill crow like that
of a rooster. Their peck releases a magical toxin that causes flesh to quickly
calcify, and any creature pecked repeatedly by an irritable cockatrice eventually
transforms into a stone statue of itself.
The first cockatrice is rumored to have hatched from a rooster’s egg incubated
on a dung hill by a toad. Whether or not the rumor is true, the cockatrice’s
monstrous appearance certainly doesn’t contradict its strange and filthy origin
story, and these creatures are more than capable of propagating on their own.
Cockatrices are remarkably fecund and gather in flocks of up to a dozen
members. Each flock contains only a few females. The males-which differ in
appearance from the females by having warty wattles and gnarled combs-
often fight with each other, with lower-ranking males eventually driven away
to find their own lairs or compete among other flocks. Most creatures who run
afoul of a solitary cockatrice do so with one of these surly outcasts.
Cockatrice lairs are often littered with fragments of statuary from past
victims-although these are as likely to be remnants of frogs, lizards, and insects
as people. Curiously, weasels and ferrets, who infiltrate cockatrice lairs to steal
their eggs, are immune to the creatures’ petrifying bites. For unknown reasons,
cockatrices are both terrified of and enraged by conventional roosters, and they
are equally likely to flee or attack when confronted by one.
Particularly brave (or foolhardy) individuals sometimes keep cockatrices as pets
or guard animals. In their natural habitat among plains, forests, and sewers near
humanoid settlements, cockatrices are content to live off vermin or scraps of waste,
but their greatest pleasure is consuming warm meals of freshly petrified flesh.
COCKATRICE CREATURE 3
N SMALL BEAST
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +11
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –3, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +6
HP 45; Immunities calcification
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +13 (finesse, magical), Damage 1d8–2 piercing
plus calcification
Calcification (incapacitation, primal, transmutation)
A peck from a cockatrice hardens the flesh
of the creature struck. The target must
succeed at a DC 20 Fortitude save or
become slowed 1 (or slowed 2 on a
critical failure). Further failed saves
against calcification increase the slowed
condition. Once a creature’s actions
are reduced to 0 by calcification, that
creature becomes petrified.
Every 24 hours after it was petrified,
the victim can attempt a DC 20 Fortitude
save to recover. On a success, it becomes flesh again, but is slowed 1 for the next
24 hours. On a critical success, the creature recovers and isn’t slowed. On a failure,
the creature remains petrified, but can try again in 24 hours. On a critical failure,
the petrification is permanent, and the creature can’t attempt any more saves.
A-C
67

66
CROCODILE RESOURCES
A crocodile’s skin can be used as
leather, and its meat is chewy and
mild, though even a large crocodile
doesn’t usually yield more than 50
pounds of usable meat.
CROCODILE LOCATIONS
Crocodiles often live in warm,
tropical areas, either in fresh or salt
water. Alligators are found in more
varied climates, but only in fresh
water. Deinosuchuses, particularly
the largest and most dangerous of
their kind, prefer estuaries, bays,
or other brackish bodies of water
connected to both river and sea.
Crocodile
Powerful and primeval in appearance, crocodiles are dangerous natural predators
that dwell in marshes, riverbeds, swamps, and other wetlands.
Crocodile
Crocodiles can be found basking on riverbanks, lurking in swamps, or floating
in lakes. They are usually are indistinguishable from logs when viewed from
afar-at least until they attack. Alligators have similar statistics, but because
they often live in more temperate climates, they endure cold temperatures
better. Unlike alligators, crocodiles can tolerate salt water. Both are formidable
predators that are likely to devour careless adventurers who fail to watch where
they step.
CROCODILE CREATURE 2
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision
Skills Athletics +8, Stealth +7 (+11 in water)
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha –4
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 30
Speed 20 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +10, Damage 1d10+4 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Aquatic Ambush [one-action] 35 feet
Death Roll [one-action] (attack) Requirement The
crocodile must have a creature grabbed.
Effect The crocodile tucks its legs and
rolls rapidly, twisting its victim. It makes
a jaws Strike with a +2 circumstance
bonus to the attack roll against the
grabbed creature. If it hits, it also knocks
the creature prone. If it fails, it releases
the creature.
Deep Breath The crocodile can hold its
breath for about 2 hours.
Deinosuchus
The deinosuchus is a primeval relative of the
crocodile, and is an enormous predator capable
of catching and eating dinosaurs that wander too
close to its domain!
DEINOSUCHUS CREATURE 9
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +17; low-light vision
Skills Athletics +20, Stealth +16 (+20 in water)
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –4
AC 26; Fort +20, Ref +16, Will +15
HP 175
Speed 30 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +22 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+13
piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +20 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage 1d10+11
bludgeoning
Aquatic Ambush [one-action] 50 feet
Deep Breath A deinosuchus can hold its breath for about 2 hours.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Large, 2d8+7 bludgeoning, Rupture 18
A-C
69

68
LOST CIVILIZATIONS
Cyclopes dwell in or near the
remains of their lost civilizations-
notably Ghol-Gan in Garund,
Koloran in northwestern
Casmaron, and various kingdoms
in Iblydos. Ruins of Ghol-Gan
still dot the archipelago of the
Shackles, and untold numbers
of treasures belonging to the
ancient cyclops empire still await
discovery. Pirates and treasure
hunters regularly conduct
expeditions in search of lost GholGani relics, but many of these
voyages never return. Among
those that do, survivors speak of
terrible curses, gruesome traps,
and one-eyed undead guardians.
Cyclops
The cyclopes are violent giants with a tragic past. Although they possess only
one eye, they could once see far more than most, possessing occult wisdom and
divinatory magic that gave them the mystic ability of foresight. But their legendary
oracular powers failed to prevent the fall of their society, and the vast kingdoms
of the cyclops long ago collapsed into ruin. Today, cyclopes have forgotten much
of what they once knew, and they skulk among the crumbling remains of their
fallen cities like forgotten kings and queens gone mad.
Cyclops
The kingdoms of the cyclopes date to an age before the rise of humanity,
when dragons and giants and serpentfolk ruled the world. The cyclopes built
enormous stone cities and prayed to ancient gods of brutality and wrath, but
their power to foresee the future failed them, and their civilization collapsed.
Today, most cyclopes have virtually no knowledge of the former glory of their
kind, even though it is not uncommon for
them to dwell among the ruins of their
greatness. Cyclops cities include monuments
and imposing murals which depict their
peoples’ history, but few now among them can
read or interpret these relics of the past.
In addition to their single eye, cyclopes are
also famous for their never-ending hunger, an
appetite so all-consuming that some scholars
theorize it may in fact be some kind of
curse. The ever-present hunger of the
cyclopes seems to have some connection
to the death of their civilization-though
whether this voracity was the cause or a
side-effect of their people’s downfall is likely
destined to remain a mystery.
Although details of the cyclopes’ gods have
largely been lost to the annals of time, what
little is known about these deities suggests they
were vindictive and petty enough to curse their
own people if they felt neglected or badly served.
CYCLOPS CREATURE 5
UNCOMMON NE LARGE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +12; low-light vision
Languages Common, Cyclops, Jotun
Skills Athletics +14, Fortune-Telling Lore
+13, Intimidation +10, Survival +12
Str +5, Dex –1, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha –1
Items greataxe, heavy crossbow (10 bolts),
hide armor
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +12
HP 80
Ferocity [reaction]
Flash of Insight [free-action] (divination, occult, fortune)
Frequency once per day; Trigger The cyclops is about
to roll a d20. Effect The cyclops peers into an occluded
spectrum of possible futures. It gets a success (but not a
critical success) on the roll instead of rolling.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] greataxe +14 (reach 10 feet, sweep),
Damage 1d12+9 slashing
A-C
69

68
CYCLOPS SEERS
Great cyclopes are traditionally
violent creatures, but some retain
fragments of the old ways that lull
them into periods of calm. During
such times, they can be incredible
sources of information, but one
must take care to be well away
from the great cyclops’s lair before
its bestial rage wakens once more.
Ranged [one-action]heavy crossbow +8 (range increment 120 feet, reload 2), Damage 1d10+4 piercing
Swipe [two-actions] (flourish) The cyclops makes a melee Strike and compares the attack roll
result to the AC of up to two foes, each of whom must be within its melee reach and
adjacent to each other. Roll damage only once and apply it to each creature hit. A
Swipe counts as two attacks for the cyclops’s multiple attack penalty.
Great Cyclops
Gigantic, dim-witted loners, the great cyclopes embody their lesser kin writ
large. They are both stronger and more violent, but their uncontrolled vision
into possible futures has driven them beyond reason. They see every moment
as a potential storm of uncontrollable fury, and out of a desperate desire for
peace, quiet, and an end to their hunger, they lash out at all who come near. Wise
creatures avoid great cyclopes at all cost.
Debate has long raged over the origins of these massive, destructive giants. They
are so large that it had long been assumed they were used as beasts of burden by
their lesser kin, but they are now free to hunt and kill without restraint. Other
scholars believe the great cyclops is the ultimate fate of the entire cyclops species.
Whatever foolish decision or wayward curse caused the end of their civilization
is still playing out, occasionally causing a cyclops to withdraw from its own kind,
lose all semblance of intellect, and mutate into a lumbering, feral colossus. It
is fortunate indeed that the great cyclops prefers to dwell far from humanoid
settlements, because its immeasurable bloodlust inspires it to destroy virtually
anything that moves, from dinosaurs and other monsters to the occasional
explorer or soon-to-be-lost caravan.
GREAT CYCLOPS CREATURE 12
UNCOMMON CE HUGE GIANT HUMANOID MUTANT
Perception +22; low-light vision
Languages Common, Cyclops, Jotun
Skills Athletics +25, any one Lore +18, Survival +22
Str +7, Dex +1, Con +6, Int –2, Wis +4, Cha –1
Items greatclub, hide armor
AC 32; Fort +25, Ref +19, Will +22
HP 235
Catch Rock [reaction]
Ferocity [reaction]
Flash of Brutality [free-action] (divination,
fortune, occult) Frequency
once per day, and recharges
when the great cyclops uses
Ferocity; Trigger The great
cyclops succeeds at an attack
roll. Effect The attack becomes a
critical success.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] greatclub +25 (backswing, reach 15 feet, shove),
Damage 3d10+13 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horn +25 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+13
piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +25 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage
3d4+13 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +23 (brutal, range increment 120
feet), Damage 4d6+7 bludgeoning
Powerful Charge [two-actions] The great cyclops Strides twice and
makes a horn Strike. If it moved at least 20 feet away from
its starting position, the Strike’s damage is increased to 3d10+20.
Throw Rock [one-action]
Bestiary
70
Daemon
Denizens of the bleak and terrible plane of Abaddon, daemons are shaped by and
devoted to the destruction of life in all its forms. They seek the death of every mortal
being by the most painful and horrible means possible, all in service to the apocalyptic
entities known as the Four Horsemen. Each kind of daemon represents a different
way to die, and their powers are nearly always aimed at spreading that particular
form of death. Through the use of these powers, they seek to drag all existence down
into a pit of hopelessness and despair, and to commit all souls to oblivion.
While those who summon daemons to the Material Plane usually seek to use
the creatures’ destructive and corrupting powers for their own ends, daemons
always look for ways to spread fear, doubt, and despair wherever they go. Often,
daemons disguise their plots as the workings of other fiends, knowing that such
confusion compounds mortals’ fear.
While all fiends seek to tempt mortals into lives of evil to increase their own
numbers and power on their native planes, daemons are further driven by a
supernatural hunger for mortal souls and use a variety of methods-not least
of which is the cacodaemons’ soul gems-to entrap them. On Abaddon and in
other forbidding places across the multiverse, souls are simultaneously a delicacy,
a trade good, and a source of magical power, and the daemons are among the
greatest gluttons, merchants, and abusers of this spiritual “resource.”
Cacodaemon (Harvester Daemon)
These embodiments of demented violence and spite are spawned from eddies of
angry and warped souls amid Abaddon’s mists. Cacodaemons constantly hunger
for mortal souls and yearn to create suffering. As gnashing spheres of teeth, fins, and
spines, they are the weakest of daemonkind, an amalgam of various petty forms of
death without the strength that comes from focusing on a single cause of demise.
CACODAEMON CREATURE 1
NE TINY DAEMON FIEND
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Common, Daemonic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Deception +5, Religion +6, Stealth +8
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +2
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 22; Immunities death effects; Weaknesses good 3
Speed 5 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +8 (agile, disease, evil, finesse, magical)
Damage 1d8 piercing plus 1d4 evil and cacodaemonia
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 2nd invisibility
(at will; self only); 1st detect alignment (at will; good only),
fear; Cantrips (1st) detect magic (at will)
Cacodaemonia (disease) The cacodaemon can telepathically
communicate with the afflicted creature at any distance on the
same plane; Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier (1
day); Stage 2 stupefied 1 (1 day); Stage 3 stupefied 2 (1 day)
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
• Lizard Speed 20 feet; Melee jaws +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d8+1
piercing
• Octopus size Small; Speed 20 feet, swim 30 feet; Melee tentacle +8
(finesse), Damage 1d8+1 bludgeoning plus Grab; Melee beak +8 (agile,
finesse), Damage 1d6 piercing plus 2 poison
• Scorpion size Small; Speed 30 feet; Melee pincer +8 (agile, finesse), Damage
1d6+1 bludgeoning plus Grab; Melee stinger +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6+1
piercing plus 1d4 poison
Soul Lock [three-actions] (death, divine, necromancy) Once per day, a cacodaemon can ingest the soul
of a sentient creature within 30 feet that died within the last minute. When it does, the
DAEMONIC DIVINITIES
Numerous powerful and unique
daemon demigods, known
collectively as harbingers, rule
over swaths of Abaddon. Above
these demigods, though, are
entities of even greater power-the
four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
As the eons go on, the names and
identities of specific horsemen
change. Currently, they consist of
Apollyon (Horseman of Pestilence),
Charon (Horseman of Death),
Szuriel (Horseman of War),
and Trelmarixian (Horseman of
Famine). Of these, only Charon has
never fallen to an upstart. Some
hold that a “Fifth Horseman” once
ruled over the other four, while
others maintain that the eternally
eclipsed sun in the skies above
Abaddon is all that remains of this
long-dead god. 
D
71
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
cacodaemon grows a fist-sized soul gem (Hardness 2, HP 8) in its gut and can regurgitate
it at any time as an Interact action. Destroying the gem frees the soul within but does
not return the deceased creature to life. The caster of a spell to return a creature to life
whose soul is trapped within a soul gem must succeed at a DC 30 Religion check. On a
success, the soul gem shatters and the creature is returned to life as normal for the spell.
By using an Interact action, a fiend can ingest a soul gem it is holding, condemning
the soul to the fiend’s home plane. The fiend gains fast healing 5 for 1 minute.
Ceustodaemon (Guardian Daemon)
Ceustodaemons are formed from the souls of vile mortals, particularly those who
took efforts to hasten their own death, their willingness shaping them into daemonic
servants. Their otherworldly senses make them useful for protecting vaults and similar
locations on the Material Plane. Ceustodaemons are created to serve, but always
seek ways to subvert their bindings, so they can rend their mortal summoners’
flesh. The worst type of conjurer calls upon ceustodaemons merely to set them
free into the world in hopes of currying favor with the powers of Abaddon.
CEUSTODAEMON CREATURE 6
NE LARGE DAEMON FIEND
Perception +14; darkvision, see invisibility
Languages Common, Daemonic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Deception +15, Intimidation +13, Stealth +12, Survival +10
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 23; Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 130; Immunities death effects;
Weaknesses good 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +16 (evil, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d10+5 piercing plus 1d6 evil
and vicious wounds
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+5 slashing plus
1d6 evil and vicious wounds
Divine Innate Spells DC 23; 7th fly, 4th dimension door (at will), 3rd dispel
magic (×2), paralyze, 1st detect alignment (at will; good only); Constant
(2nd) see invisibility
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (divine, evocation, fire) The ceustodaemon
breathes flames in a 30-foot cone. Creatures in the cone take
7d6 fire damage (DC 24 basic Reflex save). The ceustodaemon
and each creature that fails the save catch fire, taking 2d6
persistent fire damage. The breath weapon can’t be used
again for 1d4 rounds.
Drawn to Service When bringing a ceustodaemon to another
plane with effects like a planar binding or planar ally ritual,
the primary and secondary skill DCs are reduced by 5, and the
ceustodaemon demands only half the normal cost for its service.
Vicious Wounds On a successful jaws or claw Strike, the ceustodaemon
viciously tears into its victim as similar wounds appear on its
own body. The target takes an extra 1d6 amount of damage,
and the ceustodaemon takes the same extra damage. If this
extra damage to the target is doubled, due to a critical
hit, the ceustodaemon takes double damage as well.
Leukodaemon (Pestilence Daemon)
These skull-headed, vulture-winged daemons are harbingers of
pestilence and servants of their patron Horseman, Apollyon. Manifestations of evil
souls who perished from disease in life, leukodaemons work tirelessly to spread
disease across all the worlds of the multiverse. More than any other daemon,
SOUL GEMS AS TREASURE
Soul gems are traded in illicit
markets, a tradition celestials and
psychopomps alike find vile. Soul
gems’ value varies, but is generally
worth an amount relative to the
level of a gem’s captive soul.
Bestiary
72
leukodaemons cooperate with each other and those who conjure them to mortal
worlds to spread sickness and plague, eschewing personal glory for end results.
LEUKODAEMON CREATURE 9
NE LARGE DAEMON FIEND
Perception +20; darkvision, plaguesense 60 feet
Languages Common, Daemonic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +18, Intimidation +18, Medicine +20, Religion +20, Stealth +18, Survival +16
Str +6, Dex +5, Con +1, Int +3, Wis +5, Cha +3
Items +1 striking composite longbow (50 arrows)
Plaguesense A leukodaemon senses any creature with a disease, and it knows the type
and current stage of all diseases carried by any creature within range.
AC 28; Fort +15, Ref +21, Will +19; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 155; Immunities death effects, disease; Weaknesses good 10
Infectious Aura (aura, disease) 30 feet. Leukodaemons radiate infection. All creatures
within 30 feet of a leukodaemon take a –2 status penalty to saves against disease
effects. If a creature within range contracts or progresses a disease, all adjacent
creatures are exposed to the same disease, at the same DC.
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (disease, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+9 piercing plus
1d6 evil and daemonic pestilence
Melee [one-action] claw +21 (agile, disease, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+9
slashing plus 1d6 evil and daemonic pestilence
Ranged [one-action] composite longbow +21 (deadly 1d10, disease, evil,
magical, propulsive, range increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley
30 feet), Damage 2d8+9 piercing plus 1d6 evil and Daemonic
Pestilence
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 5th dimension door; 4th
dimension door (at will), dispel magic (×2); 1st detect
alignment (at will; good only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, divine) The
leukodaemon exhales a cloud of corpse-bloated,
biting black flies in a 20-foot cone. Creatures within
the cone take 4d8 piercing damage (DC 28 basic Reflex save).
A creature that fails the save becomes sickened 1 (or sickened 2 on a critical failure).
Daemonic Pestilence (disease) The leukodaemon can telepathically communicate
with the afflicted creature at any distance on the same plane; Saving Throw DC 28
Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier (1 day); Stage 2 drained 1 (1 day); Stage 3 drained 2 (1 day);
Stage 4 drained 2 (1 day); Stage 5 drained 3 (1 week); Stage 6 dead
Quicken Pestilence [one-action] (divine, manipulate, necromancy) The leukodaemon coaxes
a disease into full bloom. It chooses a target in its aura of pestilence that’s
currently affected by a disease. That creature must attempt a Fortitude
save against the disease as if the interval for the disease’s current stage
had passed.
Astradaemon (Void Daemon)
These unnerving, almost reptilian daemons represent death by direct assault
against a soul or life-force-the same numbing death they bring with their fell
touch. Rarely seen on the Material Plane, astradaemons spend most of their
time hunting the pathways between the living world and the afterlife. There,
they capture migrating souls, snatching them from their rightful rewards or
punishments and dragging them to Abaddon as tribute to their undying masters.
These horrifying predators of the dead can also be found stalking the banks of
the River of Souls in the Astral Plane, where they constantly hunt for new victims.
Psychopomps have a particular hatred of astradaemons as a result, and clashes
between them and these eerie hunters of the recently departed are indeed the stuff
of legend.
THE DAEMONIC PARADOX
Daemons embody a fundamental
paradox-while they are
incarnations of death and seek
to devour all that lives, they are
themselves living creatures. Some
speak of a glorious end time after
which reality will finally be free
of the contagion that is life itself.
Most daemons give no thought to
this paradox.
D
73
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Not all astradaemons limit their hunt to souls. The most notorious of their kind
serve the Horsemen themselves as assassins.
ASTRADAEMON CREATURE 16
NE LARGE DAEMON FIEND
Perception +28; darkvision, lifesense 30 feet, true seeing
Languages Common, Daemonic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +28, Intimidation +33, Religion +26, Stealth +28, Survival +26
Str +5, Dex +6, Con +7, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +7
AC 39; Fort +27, Ref +30, Will +26; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 240; Immunities death effects, negative; Weaknesses good 15
Soul Siphon (aura, divine, force, necromancy) 30 feet. An astradaemon draws power
from the souls of the recently slain. If a Small or larger living creature dies within its
aura, the astradaemon gains 5 temporary Hit Points and a +1 status bonus to attack
and damage rolls for 1 round, unless the creature was slain by an astradaemon’s
Devour Soul ability. Incorporeal undead and living spirits traveling outside the
body take 1d8 force damage each round within the daemon’s aura from
the spiritual pressure as the astradaemon pulls in fragments of their soul.
Displacement (divine, illusion, visual) An astradaemon bends light, appearing
shifted from its true position, though still in the same space. Creatures
targeting the astradaemon must attempt a DC 11 flat check, as if the
astradaemon were hidden, even though it remains observed. Effects such as the
Blind-Fight feat and halfling’s keen eyes that apply on the flat check against
hidden creatures also apply against a displaced astradaemon.
Speed 60 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +32 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+9 piercing plus 1d6
evil, essence drain, and Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +32 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage
3d6+9 slashing plus 1d6 evil and Essence Drain
Melee [one-action] tail +32 (evil, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage
3d10+9 bludgeoning plus 1d6 evil and Essence Drain
Divine Innate Spells DC 37; 8th discern location, finger
of death; 7th plane shift (×2), 5th dimension door;
4th dimension door (at will), 1st detect alignment
(at will; good only); Constant (6th) true seeing
Devour Soul [one-action] (divine, incapacitation,
necromancy) Requirements The astradaemon
hasn’t used an action with the attack trait yet
this turn. Effect The astradaemon draws out
and consumes the soul of a living creature it
has grabbed. The creature must succeed at
a DC 35 Fortitude save or instantly die. If it
dies, the astradaemon gains 10 temporary
Hit Points and a +2 status bonus to attack
and damage rolls for 1 minute, or for 1
day if the victim was 15th level or higher.
A victim slain in this way can be returned
to life normally. A creature that survives is
temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Essence Drain (divine, necromancy, negative) When an
astradaemon hits with its claw, jaws, or tail, it drains the target’s spiritual and
vital essences. The target takes 2d10 negative energy damage and the astradaemon
regains an equal number of Hit Points. The target must succeed at a DC
37 Fortitude save or become doomed 1 and drained 1. If
the target was already drained or doomed, it instead
increases both conditions’ value by 1, to a maximum
of 4.
OTHER DAEMONS
As many daemons exist as there
are awful ways to die. The bloody
sangudaemon personifies death
by blood loss, while the skeletal
thanadaemon represents death
from old age. The most powerful
daemons are the olethrodaemons,
who represent the massive deaths
caused by apocalypses and the end
of entire worlds.
D
75

74
Deep Gnome
These distant cousins to gnomes are reclusive, underground dwellers.
Svirfneblins, as deep gnomes call themselves, have skin the color of gray or
brown stone. While deep gnome males are bald, women have thin, pale-gray
hair, and all have the large, expressive eyes typical among all gnomes. A deep
gnome is 3 feet tall and weighs approximately 65 pounds. Deep gnomes rarely
interact with those outside of their small cavern communities, and they are
slow to trust outsiders, sometimes keeping them imprisoned for years simply to
prevent them from informing others of the deep gnome settlement.
The first deep gnomes rose in the underground world some time after their
early gnome ancestors migrated from the First World to Golarion. A group
of these migrants elected to settle underground instead of on the surface, and
it was from these gnomes that the svirfneblin came to be. Some believe the
gnomes chose the Darklands as their home to watch for and stop any evil fey
who might infiltrate the underground region, but much like the exact reasons
for the gnomes’ relocation, their motivation has been lost to time. Thousands
of years of living in subterranean caverns with little to no light transformed
the physical characteristics of the gnomes living there into those of the deep
gnome of today.
Though deep gnomes may seem dour and recalcitrant at first glance, they
retain the fey blood of their ancestors. In fact, deep gnomes are sometimes more
emotionally erratic than their gnome cousins, lashing out violently at what
seems like the smallest provocation. Such an explosion is often followed by an
extended period of quiet brooding. Despite this, deep gnome communities are
close-knit, as each citizen knows when to give the others the space they require
to process their feelings.
Many deep gnome settlements have clashed with nearby duergar
(pages 138–139) communities for myriad reasons: resources, territory, and even
religion and morality. Over the centuries, some of these disputes have evolved
into full wars, with many lives lost on both sides. Neither deep gnomes nor
duergars are particularly proud of these conflicts, but both insist they were in
the right each time. The ferocity with which most duergars fight has left
a deep impression on the psyches of some deep gnome communities,
leading them to distrust all dwarves and dwarf-like ancestries even
more than other strangers. This can result in non-duergar dwarves
being driven off from deep gnome cities before being able to explain
themselves. A dwarf and even those traveling with a dwarf require patience
and tenacity when attempting to deal with deep gnomes holding such views.
Svirfneblins value crafting and many decorate their cavernous homes with
paintings on the walls, often incorporating the rock in clever ways. They also
value crystals and gems, making jewelry and beads that they string through
their hair.
Deep Gnome Scout
Deep gnome scouts patrol the tunnels that lead into their
settlements. Some scout alone to make the most of their
stealth, but others form groups for the sake of safety.
DEEP GNOME SCOUT CREATURE 1
N SMALL GNOME HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Gnomish, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +7, Nature +5, Stealth +7 (+10 underground), Survival +5
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –1
Items light pick, sling (20 bullets)
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +5
HP 18
DEEP GNOME FAITH
While most deep gnomes aren’t
particularly religious, they respect
the spirits of nature, especially
those found within earth and
stone. Most deep gnome druids,
known as “rockwardens,” learn
Terran, the language of the Plane
of Earth, in order to speak with
these forces, and some can even
entreat with earth elementals.
The handful of deep gnome
communities of faith tend to
worship neutral deities, such
as Gozreh, Nethys, Pharasma,
and the gnomish goddess Nivi
Rhombodazzle. In such areas, a
small church to the worshipped
god is erected in the center of
town and is open to the public
around the clock, allowing the
deep gnomes to worship as they
see fit.
D
75

74
FEW FRIENDS BELOW
Most who dwell in the Darklands
are sinister and cruel. While deep
gnomes are not, those who seek
their aid should remember that
they don’t welcome strangers
with open arms. In the brutal
Darklands, such traits are seized
upon by its denizens and treated
as much as weaknesses as
they are strengths.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] light pick +7 (agile, fatal d8), Damage 1d4+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] sling +9 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6+1 bludgeoning
Primal Innate Spells DC 14; 1st illusory disguise
Hidden Movement If the deep gnome scout starts its turn undetected or hidden to a
creature, that creature is flat-footed against the deep gnome scout’s attacks until the
end of the turn.
Deep Gnome Warrior
Deep gnome warriors are quick to charge into battle but focus on defending
their kin and their homes over more aggressive tactics when a choice
is available.
DEEP GNOME WARRIOR CREATURE 2
N SMALL GNOME HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Gnomish, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +5, Stealth +5
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha –1
Items heavy crossbow (20 bolts), spear, steel shield (Hardness 5, HP 20, BT 10), studded
leather armor
AC 18 (20 with shield raised); Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 34
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] spear +10, Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] heavy crossbow +8 (range increment 120 feet, reload 2), Damage
1d10 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 15; 1st illusory disguise
Deep Gnome Rockwarden
Deep gnome rockwardens follow druidic teachings and commune with
the natural elemental influences and denizens of the Darklands. They
know that not everything that lives below ground is sinister and
evil, but they also understand that all primal spirits and entities
must be respected.
DEEP GNOME ROCKWARDEN CREATURE 5
N SMALL GNOME HUMANOID
Perception +14; darkvision
Languages Gnomish, Terran, Undercommon
Skills Crafting +9, Diplomacy +11, Nature +14, Stealth +9
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +5, Cha +2
Items hide armor, pick, primal focus, scroll of nondetection, sling (10 bullets)
AC 22; Fort +12, Ref +9, Will +14
HP 63
Speed 15 feet
Melee [one-action] pick +10 (fatal d10), Damage 1d6 piercing
Ranged [one-action] sling +11 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet), Damage 1d6
bludgeoning
Primal Prepared Spells DC 24, attack +14; 3rd blindness, meld into stone;
2nd acid arrow, deafness, spider climb; 1st ant haul, shocking grasp,
ventriloquism; Cantrips (3rd) acid splash, detect magic, prestidigitation,
produce flame, read aura
Primal Innate Spells DC 21; 1st illusory disguise
D
77

76
DEMONIC DEITIES
The most powerful demons are
known as demon lords (the term
is gender neutral in this case).
Of these divinities, Lamashtu is
the most powerful. Countless
other demon lords exist, including
Abraxas, Cyth-V’sug, Kabriri,
and Zura.
Demon
When a sinful mortal soul is judged and sent on to the Abyss, it can become a
deadly fiend-a demon. Demons are living incarnations of sin-be they classic
sins like wrath or gluttony, or more “specialized” depravities like an obsession
with torture or the act of treason or treachery. Once formed, a demon’s driving
goals are twofold-the amassing of personal power, and the corruption of mortal
souls to cause them to become tainted by sin. In this way demons ensure a neverending supply of new demons to bolster their ever-growing ranks in the Abyss.
Quasit
Unlike other demons, quasits are formed when a mortal spellcaster sheds a portion
of their own sinful soul to create a familiar or companion. When these quasits outlive
their creators, they become free willed and seek methods of returning to the Abyss,
a task that requires pledging servitude to more powerful demons, so many quasits
instead opt to remain on the Material Plane to promote evil and hope for chance and
luck to someday provide them with a method of reaching the Abyss on their own.
QUASIT CREATURE 1
CE TINY DEMON FIEND
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Common; telepathy (touch)
Skills Acrobatics +7, Arcana +4, Deception +7, Intimidation +5, Religion +5, Stealth +7
Str –1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +2
Abyssal Knowledge When a quasit offers Aid for an Arcana or Religion check, it gets the
critical success result on any success and gets the critical failure result on any failure.
AC 17; Fort +4, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 25; Weaknesses cold iron 3, good 3
Virtue Aversion The quasit’s link to a mortal soul gave it birth, but it presents a
vulnerability. Once per round, a creature can present an object related to something
virtuous or good in the life of the quasit’s creator (such as a beloved daughter’s doll) as
an Interact action to automatically deal the quasit 2d6 mental damage.
Speed 15 feet, fly 35 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +9 (agile, evil, finesse, magical, poison), Damage 1d6–1 slashing plus 1d4
evil and quasit venom
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 2nd detect alignment (at will; good only),
invisibility (at will, self only); 1st fear; Cantrips (1st) detect magic
Abyssal Healing [one-action] (concentrate, divine, healing, necromancy) Frequency once per
round; Effect The quasit restores 1d6 HP to itself.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
• Bat echolocation 40 feet; Speed 15 feet, fly Speed 30 feet; Melee fangs +7, Damage
1d4–1 piercing; Melee wing +7 (agile), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning
• Centipede Speed 10 feet, climb 10 feet; Melee mandibles +7 (poison), Damage 1
piercing plus 1d4 poison
• Toad scent (imprecise) 30 feet; Speed 5 feet; Melee jaws +7, Damage 1 bludgeoning
• Wolf size Medium; scent (imprecise) 30 feet; Speed 40 feet, climb 10 feet; Melee
jaws +7, Damage 1d10–1 piercing plus Knockdown
Quasit Venom (poison) Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1
1d6 poison (1 round); Stage 2 As stage 1; Stage 3 1d6 poison and slowed 1 (1 round)
D
77

76
THE NATURE OF CHAOS
Some say that the nature of chaos
inherently precludes cooperation
and subtlety, but demons are
proof of the fallacy of this claim.
Succubus (Lust Demon)
Succubi are manifestations of the sin of destructive lust, and they are the most
attractive of all demons-as befits their role in seducing mortals to fall to sin. The
concept of gender is fluid to a succubus, as they can adopt countless humanoid
forms of any gender to aid in their goals. Most succubi have a feminine true form
(incubi, which usually have a masculine true form, are a different kind of demon),
but regardless of gender, a lust demon is supernaturally beautiful or handsome,
but with curving horns, bat wings, sharp claws, and a sinuous tail.
When disguised as a mortal humanoid on the Material Plane, a succubus
whispers into the ears of mortals, urging them to pursue their darkest and
most destructive desires and pushing them into depravity, using magic only if
persuasion fails. While mortals often fixate on succubi’s application of sexual
lust, these demons are can easily exploit lust for power, knowledge, fame, or
any other desire as easily as more carnal appetites. Their ability to infiltrate
societies makes them excellent spies, assassins, and political saboteurs as
well. Ultimately, the succubus enjoys all means of upending mortal culture.
SUCCUBUS CREATURE 7
CE MEDIUM DEMON FIEND
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Common, Draconic, three additional mortal
languages; telepathy 100 feet, tongues
Skills Acrobatics +14, Deception +18, Diplomacy +20,
Intimidate +16, Religion +13, Society +15, Stealth +14
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +7
AC 23; Fort +15, Ref +14, Will +17; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 100; Weaknesses cold iron 5, good 5
Rejection Vulnerability As succubi are beings of pure lust, creatures
that reject their lust can metaphysically harm them. When a
succubus fails a Diplomacy check to Embrace or Request, or when
a creature succeeds at its save against a succubus’s mental spell
or ability, the succubus takes 2d6 mental damage. For one hour
after causing mental damage to a succubus in this way, a creature
can deal 2d6 mental damage to the succubus with a successful
Demoralize incorporating its rejection.
Seductive Presence (aura, charm, emotion, mental) 10 feet. Any
creature in the aura that could be sexually attracted to a succubus
takes a –2 circumstance penalty to checks and DCs to oppose the
succubus’s mental spells, Deception, and Diplomacy.
Speed 25 feet, fly 35 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile, evil, finesse, magical), Damage 2d8+8 slashing plus
1d6 evil
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 6th dominate; 5th dimension door; 4th
dimension door (at will), suggestion (at will); 3rd mind reading (at will);
2nd detect alignment (at will); 1st charm (at will) Constant (5th) tongues
Divine Rituals DC 26; Abyssal pact
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The
succubus can take on the appearance of any Small or Medium humanoid. This doesn’t
change their Speed or their attack and damage modifiers with their Strikes, but it
might change the damage type their Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning).
Embrace [one-action] (attack) The succubus attempts to Grapple a creature using their Diplomacy
bonus instead of Athletics. If the creature is willing, the succubus grapples it automatically.
Passionate Kiss [one-action] (divine, emotion, enchantment, mental) Frequency Once per round.
Effect The succubus engages a creature they have grabbed in an embrace or other
act of passion to drain its vital essence. The kiss makes the creature drained 1 or
increases its drained condition by 1, to a maximum of 4. The creature takes 3d6
negative damage and the succubus regains Hit Points equal to the damage dealt. 
D
79

78
WHAT MAKES A SIN?
Some classify sin into seven
categories-envy, gluttony, greed,
lust, pride, sloth, and wrath. While
these sins embody some of the most
powerful and numerous demons, far
more than seven demons exist. Any
act of cruelty or destruction a mortal
takes to gratify the self at others’
expense is, in effect, a sin, and any
such act can spawn a
demon from a soul in
the afterlife.
The target must succeed at a DC 26 Will save or be affected by a suggestion to submit
to more actions of passion rather than trying to Escape.
Profane Gift [three-actions] (divine, enchantment, mental); Frequency once per day. Effect The
succubus on can give a willing humanoid a profane gift. That creature gains a +1 status
bonus to attack rolls, skill checks, and saving throws. As long as the gift persists, the
succubus can communicate telepathically with the target at any distance, see through
the creature’s senses, and target the creature with suggestion through the telepathic
link. In addition, the creature uses an outcome one degree of success worse than it rolls
on saving throws against the lust demon’s suggestions.
A humanoid can’t have more than one profane gift at a time, and a succubus can’t
grant more than one profane gift at a time. Removing the gift requires an atone ritual. The
succubus can remove the gift as a free action to give the recipient a permanent stupefied
3 condition. A 4th-level restoration spell is required to reduce this stupefied condition by 1.
A summoned succubus can’t grant a profane gift.
Vrock (Wrath Demon)
When the gates to the Abyss swing wide, the first demons through are often
vrocks, vulture-headed scions of rage who wheel through the air on black wings
or dance with the exultation of their fiendish power. Their hatred for mortals is
matched only by their desire to inflict suffering through
their horrible screech or their devastating dance.
Vrocks form from the souls of hateful mortals
who are thus given another chance to inflict their
rage on the world.
Vrocks often travel in small groups so as to make the
best use of their dance of ruin ability, but they rarely
appear in groups larger than four. Against small groups
and individuals, they swoop down without fear, hoping
to play with their prey before going for the kill. Against
formidable foes, they are just as happy to fly above, using
their dance of ruin to cast a storm of lightning down on them.
VROCK CREATURE 9
CE LARGE DEMON FIEND
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Draconic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +18, Intimidation +18, Performance +18,
Religion +18, Stealth +18, Survival +16
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +3
AC 28; Fort +20, Ref +18, Will +15; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 185; Weaknesses cold iron 10, good 10; Resistances electricity 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] If the vrock is flying and a creature triggers an
attack of opportunity, the vrock can make 2 Strikes with its talons against
that creature instead of 1 Strike.
Peace Vulnerability A vrock’s wrath is the heart of their essence, and forcing
peace upon them wrenches at their soul. If they fail a save against calm emotions
or a similar effect forcing them to be peaceful, a vrock takes 4d6 mental damage.
Speed 25 feet, fly 35 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +21 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+9 piercing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] claw +21 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d6+9 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] talon +19 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+8 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 5th dimension door; 4th dimension door (at will); 2nd
mirror image
Divine Rituals DC 26; Abyssal pact
Dance of Ruin [three-actions] (divine, electricity, evocation, manipulate, move) The vrock dances
in flight and chants to create a ruinous explosion of electricity. If more vrocks within
30 feet want to join the dance, the vrock can delay the dance to wait for more vrocks;
FPO
D
79

78
DEMONIC POSSESSION
Some demons specialize in the art
of possessing creatures or objects
to spread fear and chaos. In such
cases a demon gains a powerful
disguise with which to work its
evils upon the world, a subterfuge
that delights the demon.
in that case, the effect occurs after the last vrock uses Dance of Ruin or one of the
vrocks chooses to complete that round of the dance. Each non-demon creature in a
20-foot emanation from any of the dancing vrocks takes 2d12 electricity damage
(DC 28 basic Reflex save). For each additional vrock that joins the dance, the damage
increases by 1d12 and the save DC increases by 1 (to a maximum of four vrocks dealing
5d12 damage with a DC 31 save). The vrocks can continue dancing by using Dance of
Ruin each round, for up to 3 rounds in total. The emanation’s size increases by 20 feet
each round, and the damage increases by 1d12 per vrock each round.
Spore Cloud [one-action] (disease, poison) The vrock emits a cloud of spores from their body,
dealing 2d8 poison damage to all adjacent creatures. Each creature damaged this way
must succeed at a DC 28 Fortitude save or take 2d8 persistent piercing damage as the
spores penetrate its skin and grow into thick, green vines. The vines cease growing
after 10 rounds, and they wither away in 1d4 days if not shaved off before then. The
vines can be destroyed if the creature is affected by a good spell or if holy water is
applied to the vines (with an Interact action). Once the vrock uses Spore Cloud, the
ability can’t be used for 1d6 rounds.
Stunning Screech [one-action] (auditory, divine, incapacitation, sonic) Frequency once per minute.
Effect The vrock emits a shrill screech. Each non-demon creature within a 30-foot
burst must attempt a DC 28 Fortitude save. On a failure, the creature is stunned 2,
and on a critical failure, it’s stunned 3.
Glabrezu (Treachery Demon)
Glabrezus are looming behemoths who revel in the act of twisting
mortal desires into their ultimate ruin, betraying and manipulating as
easily as they breathe. Desires granted by a glabrezu always come to
fruition in the most destructive way possible, turning a wish or hope
into a potent and devastating act of betrayal-although the long-term
repercussions are not always immediately apparent. For example, a
struggling weapon smith might wish for fame and skill at their craft, only
to find that their best patron is a cruel and sadistic murderer who uses the
weapons in bloody sprees. Or a lonely widower might have his desire granted
in the form of a lost love returned to “life” as a vampire. Glabrezus
are nothing if not creative in addressing a mortal’s needs.
These massive demons have enormous pincers and
a pair of smaller humanoid arms sprouting from their
chests, but their size belies their skill at magic, and they possess
formidable innate spells. Treachery demons arise from the
souls of mortals engaged in treason and deception.
GLABREZU CREATURE 13
CE HUGE DEMON FIEND
Perception +24; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Draconic; telepathy 100 feet, tongues
Skills Deception +28, Diplomacy +26, Intimidation +26, Religion +22, Society +22, Stealth +21
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +7, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +7
AC 34; Fort +26, Ref +19, Will +24; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 280; Weaknesses cold iron 10, good 10
Truth Vulnerability A glabrezu’s lies sustain them, and the truth can destroy them.
Whenever a revelation effect counteracts or reveals the glabrezu’s illusions or the
glabrezu fails a save against an effect that would prevent them from lying (such as zone
of truth), the demon takes 3d6 mental damage. They take this damage only once
per effect, even if the effect reveals multiple illusions or prevents multiple lies.
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] pincer +27 (deadly 2d10, evil, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+13
bludgeoning plus 1d6 evil and Grab
Melee [one-action] claw +27 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d6+13 slashing
plus 1d6 evil
D
81

80
SINFUL DESTRUCTION
While they enjoy causing
destruction themselves, most
demons prefer to trick and tempt
mortals into falling to sin of their
own volition.
Melee [one-action] jaws +27 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d12+13 piercing plus 1d6 evil
Divine Innate Spells DC 34; 7th illusory disguise (at will), reverse gravity; 6th dispel magic (at
will); 5th dimension door; 4th confusion (at will), dimension door (at will); 2nd mirror image
(at will); Cantrips (7th) telekinetic projectile; Constant (6th) true seeing; (5th) tongues
Divine Rituals DC 34; Abyssal pact
Captive Rake [one-action] Requirements A creature is grabbed in the glabrezu’s pincer. Effect The
glabrezu pulls the grabbed creature up to 5 feet closer, then makes two claw Strikes
against it. Those Strikes count as one attack when determining a treachery demon’s
multiple attack penalty, and the penalty doesn’t increase until after both Strikes.
Steady Spellcasting When a reaction would disrupt a glabrezu’s spell, the demon can
attempt a DC 15 flat check, avoiding the disruption on a success.
Sudden Betrayal A glabrezu can always use Deception when rolling initiative as
long as they’re aware of at least one opponent before initiative is rolled. When using
Deception for initiative, the demon gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Deception.
Treacherous Veil A glabrezu’s illusory disguise can allow it to appear as a creature of any size.
Twisted Desires (divination, divine) Once per month, a glabrezu can grant a mortal
humanoid the effects of a miracle spell granted by an Abyssal patron, though the
glabrezu always perverts the miracle according to their own treacherous nature.
Shemhazian (Mutilation Demon)
Shemhazians rise from the souls of torturers and those who reveled in
mutilating the physical bodies of their victims. Standing 35 feet tall, a
shemhazian is well equipped with a wide range of talons, claws, and fangs to
continue inflicting such torments on those it encounters.
Shemhazians delight in visiting torment upon mortals, of course, but
more than most demons, these fiends revel in sharing the pain with their
own kind. Other demons fear and hate shemhazians for this reason, with
only the most powerful willing to work with a shemhazian to achieve a
shared goal. Even then, the shemhazian is always on the watch for an opportunity
to bring pain and suffering to its allies along with any foe.
SHEMHAZIAN CREATURE 16
CE GARGANTUAN DEMON FIEND
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Draconic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Athletics +31, Deception +25, Intimidation +27, Medicine +28,
Religion +30
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +7, Int +0, Wis +6, Cha +3
AC 39; Fort +32, Ref +26, Will +27; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 350; Weaknesses cold iron 15, good 15
Paralyzing Gaze (aura, divine, enchantment, visual) 30 feet. A
non-evil creature that ends its turn in the aura must attempt a
DC 35 Fortitude save. If it fails, it’s slowed 1 for 1 round, and
if it critically fails, it is instead paralyzed for 1 round.
Succor Vulnerability A shemhazian’s mutilation is a
part of them, and they can’t bear to see it reversed.
The first time each round that a creature heals from
damage the shemhazian dealt on their last turn, the
demon takes 3d6 mental damage.
Tail Whip [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the
shemhazian’s tail leaves a square during a move action it’s using. Effect The
shemhazian attempts to Trip the triggering creature. On a success, the creature also
takes damage as if the shemhazian had hit with a tail Strike, and if the creature was
flying, it falls 30 feet.
Speed 35 feet, climb 20 feet, fly 35 feet (from fly)
Melee [one-action] jaws (evil, magical, reach 20 feet) +33, Damage 3d12+17 piercing plus 1d6 evil
and enfeebling bite
D
81

80
DEMONIC LOCATIONS
The sprawling, heaving, changing
realm of the Abyss is the planar
home of demonic life,
but demons can be found
anywhere the capacity to
sin exists. Evil or foolish
conjurers are fond of
calling upon demons for
advice or darker needs.
When the Abyss wears
through the boundaries of
reality to create wound-like
portals into other worlds,
demons can spill over to
wreak incredible havoc.
Melee [one-action] claw (agile, evil, magical, reach 20 feet) +33, Damage 3d8+17 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] pincer (evil, magical, reach 20 feet) +33, Damage 3d8+17 bludgeoning plus 1d6
evil and Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] tail (evil, magical, reach 30 feet) +33, Damage 3d6+17 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Divine Innate Spells DC 37; 8th divine decree (evil only); 5th dimension door, prying eye
(×3); 4th clairvoyance (×3), dimension door (at will); 2nd invisibility (at will);
Constant (7th) fly, true seeing
Divine Rituals DC 36; Abyssal pact
Enfeebling Bite (divine, necromancy) If the
shemhazian’s jaws Strike damages a creature, the
target is enfeebled 3. The target can attempt a DC
37 Fortitude save to reduce this to
enfeebled 1 (or be unaffected on a
critical success).
Focused Gaze [one-action] (concentrate, divine,
enchantment, incapacitation, visual)
The shemhazian focuses their gaze
on a non-evil creature they can see
within 30 feet. If that creature isn’t
already slowed by the shemhazian’s
paralyzing gaze, it must attempt a save
against the shemhazian’s paralyzing gaze. If that
creature is slowed, it must succeed at a DC 35
Fortitude save or be paralyzed for 1 round. A
shemhazian can’t use this ability against the
same creature more than once per round.
Rend [one-action] claw
Marilith (Pride Demon)
Mariliths are the generals of the Abyss, formed from the souls of proud evil
mortals, often warlords and despots. They appear as tall and powerfully built
humans from the waist up with snake tails and six arms. Because of Lamashtu’s
prominence over other demonic deities, most pride demons encountered by
mortals take female form, but they can be of any gender.
Mariliths are among the greatest tacticians in the Abyss, and they have an
almost supernatural knack for understanding the ripples of chaos and the
unpredictable nature of demonic life. Their ability to command armies rises as
much from their commanding presence as it does their ability to read into the
potential results of any possible act and a sufficient understanding of the flow of
entropy to allow them to predict likely outcomes.
MARILITH CREATURE 17
CE LARGE DEMON FIEND
Perception +30; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Draconic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +33, Deception +30, Diplomacy +30, Intimidation +32,
Religion +29, Stealth +29, Warfare Lore +31
Str +8, Dex +6, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +7
Items longsword (6)
AC 40; Fort +31, Ref +29, Will +27; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 380; Weaknesses cold iron 15, good 15
Commander’s Aura (aura, divine, enchantment) 100 feet. Commanded
or allied evil creatures in the aura of lower level than the marilith
gain a +1 circumstance bonus to attack rolls, damage rolls, AC, saves,
and skill checks.
Failure Vulnerability A marilith’s pride feeds their strength, so the sting of
failure wounds them. If the marilith uses a damaging spell or makes a Strike on 
D
83

82
their turn but doesn’t deal any damage that turn, they take 3d6+10 mental damage at the
end of their turn and their commander’s aura deactivates until the end of their next turn.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] A marilith gains 5 extra reactions per round that they can use
only to make Attacks of Opportunity. The demon can’t use more than one on the same
triggering action, even if a creature leaves several squares in the marilith’s reach, and the
marilith must use a different weapon for each Attack of Opportunity.
Speed 40 feet, fly 40 feet (from fly)
Melee [one-action] cold iron silver longsword +35 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet, versatile P), Damage
3d8+16 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] tail +33 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d12+16 bludgeoning plus 1d6
evil and Grab
Divine Innate Spells DC 38; 9th blade barrier (×2), weapon storm (×2); 5th dimension door;
4th dimension door (at will); Constant (6th) true seeing; (4th) fly
Divine Rituals DC 38; Abyssal pact
Bladestorm [two-actions] The marilith makes up to six longsword Strikes,
each against a different target. These attacks count toward the
marilith’s multiple attack penalty, but the multiple attack penalty
doesn’t increase until after all the attacks.
Defensive Assault [two-actions] The marilith makes two Strikes, each with a
different weapon, and they use the remaining weapons for protection.
The demon gains a circumstance bonus to AC for 1 round equal to
the number of weapons not used for attacks. If the marilith
later uses any of those weapons to attack (including for an
Attack of Opportunity), the bonus to AC decreases by 1 for
each weapon used.
Focused Assault [two-actions] The marilith attacks a single target
with all the weapons they wield in their arms, overwhelming
the target with multiple attacks and leaving almost nowhere to dodge.
The demon makes a longsword Strike. On a successful attack, the marilith
deals longsword damage to the target, plus an additional 1d8 damage for every
longsword they wield beyond the first (typically 5d8 extra damage).
Even on a failed attack, the marilith deals the damage from one
longsword to the target, though they still miss completely
on a critical failure. This counts toward the marilith’s
multiple attack penalty as a number of attacks equal
to the number of longswords the pride demon wields.
Greater Constrict [one-action] 2d12+13 bludgeoning,
DC 39
Infuse Weapons (divine, evocation) Any
weapon becomes a +2 greater striking weapon
made of cold iron and silver while a marilith
wields it. The marilith can change its evil damage
to chaotic whenever it attacks.
Balor (Fire Demon)
When folk whisper frightened tales of the demonic, what most
envision is the balor-a towering figure of fire and flesh, a horned
nightmare armed with a flaming whip and a sword flying through the
night in search of its latest victim. On the Abyss, balors serve demon lords as
generals or captains, and they typically command vast legions of demons. Standing
at 14 feet in height, only the cruelest mortal souls-those who devoted entire lives to
sins too numerous to count-can fuel the formation of a balor. More often, a balor
forms from a mass of dozens of mortal souls who shared debased ideologies in life.
Balor Lords
Those rare few balors who form from single souls are the ones most likely to
eventually transcend the notable power they already wield, becoming a nascent
DEMONIC SOURCES
When a sinful mortal soul is
consigned to the Abyss, it spends
time wallowing in the mire and
feeding on filth. If it survives
and is not itself eaten, the soul
eventually ascends into a demon,
as influenced by the nature of
its sin, yet most demons
are themselves capable
of reproduction as well. The
fecundity of demonic life is
perhaps the greatest-and most
threatening-aspect of these
dangerous fiends.
D
83

82
OTHER DEMONS
The Abyss may be the largest of
the Outer Planes, and mortals
have an equally large capacity to
betray themselves, society, and the
natural order of reality. With this
limitless source for increasingly
specialized sins, the Abyss is
constantly generating new types of
demons to plague reality. While the
vast majority of these are swiftly
destroyed and never rise again,
enough survive that dozens, if
not hundreds, of types of demons
are known to exist beyond those
listed here. The shadowy invidiak
is a demon without a body, born
of envious souls. The goat-faced,
flame-hooved brimorak rises
from the souls of arsonists. Slimy,
horned blood demons spawn from
assassins, boar demons from the
greedy... the list goes on and on.
demon lord. These balor lords are each unique creatures of 21st to 25th level in
power who rule their own realm in the Abyss. In time, a balor lord can further
develop into a unique creature with wildly different powers, even ascending to the
role of a true demon lord.
BALOR CREATURE 20
CE LARGE DEMON FIEND
Perception +36; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Draconic; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +35, Athletics +37, Deception +36, Diplomacy +32, Intimidation +38,
Religion +32, Society +32, Stealth +33
Str +9, Dex +7, Con +9, Int +6, Wis +6, Cha +8
Items longsword
AC 45; Fort +39, Ref +35, Will +34; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 480; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 20, cold iron 20, good 20
Aura of Flame (aura, divine, evocation, fire) 20 feet. A foe that starts its turn in the
aura takes 3d6+10 fire damage, or 6d6+20 fire damage if the balor has grabbed or
restrained it. A creature that hits a balor with an unarmed Strike takes 3d6+10 fire
damage, and weapons that hit a balor take 3d6+10 fire damage.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] The balor can use Attack of Opportunity when a creature within
their reach uses a concentrate action, in addition to its normal trigger. They can disrupt
triggering concentrate actions, and they disrupt actions on any hit, not just a critical hit.
Death Throes (death, divine, evocation, fire) When a balor dies, their body explodes in
a 100-foot aura of intense demonic flame. All creatures and objects in range take
16d10 fire damage (DC 45 basic Reflex save). Because the flame is infused with
Abyssal energy, creatures in the area apply only half their usual fire resistance.
Creatures with immunity to fire use an outcome one degree of success better than
what they rolled, instead of gaining the usual benefit of immunity. The bodies of
creatures reduced to 0 Hit Points by a balor’s death throes are completely incinerated
into fine ash.
Speed 35 feet, fly 70 feet
Melee [one-action] vorpal cold iron silver longsword +40 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet, versatile P),
Damage 4d8+17 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] cold iron silver flame whip +40 (disarm, evil, fire, magical, reach 20 feet, trip),
Damage 4d6+17 fire plus 1d6 evil, Improved Grab, and whip reposition
Divine Innate Spells DC 44; 10th dimension door, divine decree (×2); 8th dispel magic (at
will); 6th dominate (at will); 5th dimension door (at will); Cantrips (10th) telekinetic
projectile; Constant (6th) true seeing
Divine Rituals DC 44; Abyssal pact
Dimensional Dervish A balor can cast their 5th-level innate dimension door with only a
single action.
Dispelling Strike [free-action] Frequency once per round. Trigger The balor hits a creature, object,
or spell effect with a weapon Strike. Effect The balor casts an innate dispel magic on
the target of the triggering Strike.
Infuse Weapons (divine, evocation) Any weapon a balor wields becomes a +3 major
striking vorpal weapon made of cold iron and silver while the demon holds it. A
weapon that isn’t eligible for the vorpal rune doesn’t gain its effects. The balor can
change its evil damage to chaotic whenever it attacks. The demon can conjure a whip
made of flames with an Interact action. This whip gains the same benefits as other
weapons the balor wields.
Lifedrinker [free-action] (divine, healing, necromancy) Trigger The balor kills a living creature that
is at least 15th level. Effect The balor drinks the triggering creature’s life force and
regains 10d8+80 Hit Points.
Whip Reposition When a balor grabs a creature with a whip Strike, they can move the
creature to any space in the whip’s reach. The balor can move without ending the grab
as long as the creature remains within the whip’s reach, and the balor can move the
creature to any other space in the whip’s reach with an Interact action.
D
85

84
THE SUN! IT BURNS!
Deros are fixated with curing their
allergy to sunlight. To understand
how the surface dwellers can
withstand the light of the sun,
deros conduct late-night raids on
surface cities, abducting victims and
performing terrible experiments on
them. Those who survive are often
returned with much of their memory
erased and their bodies bearing
mysterious scars. When these
repressed memories surface, they
lead to wild, hazy recollections of
being abducted.
Dero
Deros are short, wiry humanoids with milky white eyes, gray-blue skin,
and wild shocks of off-white or gray hair. The descendants of a mysterious
type of fey abandoned in the deepest, darkest caverns of Golarion, deros are
the subject of fearful legends and folk tales to most of the world’s surface
races. They skulk beneath major metropolitan areas, performing cruel and
twisted experiments on unwilling subjects. A dero is 3 feet tall and weighs
approximately 70 pounds.
Dero Stalker
Dero stalkers are those charged with exploring the surface world by night and
seeking out new victims to abduct.
DERO STALKER CREATURE 2
CE SMALL DERO HUMANOID
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +8, Medicine +3, Stealth +8, Thievery +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +0, Wis –1, Cha +1
Items aklys (page 85) , giant centipede venom (4 doses), hand crossbow (20 bolts)
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +3
HP 30; Weaknesses vulnerable to sunlight
Vulnerable to Sunlight A dero stalker takes 4 damage for every hour they’re exposed
to sunlight.
Nimble Dodge [reaction] Requirements The dero stalker is not encumbered. Trigger A
creature targets the dero with an attack and the dero can see the attacker. Effect
The dero dodges out of the way, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against
the triggering attack.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] aklys +8 (trip), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] aklys +10 (ranged trip, tethered, thrown 20 feet; page 85), Damage
1d6+2 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +10 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6
piercing plus giant centipede venom
Occult Innate Spells DC 17; Cantrips (1st) daze, ghost sound
Sneak Attack A dero stalker deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Dero Strangler
Dero stranglers specialize in capturing living victims, and they are often
called upon to aid in abductions.
DERO STRANGLER CREATURE 3
CE SMALL DERO HUMANOID
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +11, Intimidation +7, Medicine +4, Stealth +10
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +0, Wis –1, Cha +2
Items aklys (page 85), hand crossbow (10 bolts), lethargy poison (5 doses), rope (50 feet)
AC 19; Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 45; Immunities confusion; Weaknesses vulnerable to sunlight
Vulnerable to Sunlight As dero stalker, but 8 damage.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] aklys +11 (trip; page 85), Damage 1d6+6 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] aklys +10 (ranged trip, tethered, thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+6
bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +10 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6+2 piercing plus lethargy poison
D
85

84
CYTILLESH
Deros grow and ingest a poisonous
fungus called cytillesh, also known
as brain mold. Cytillesh gives off
a pale blue glow and can cause
birth defects and various adverse
effects. Deros aren’t fazed by these
detriments, as prolonged exposure
can also slow the effects of aging
and, in rare cases, provide occult
powers to certain individuals
known as “magisters.” Deros can
also brew cytillesh spores into a
poison that creates delusions and
hallucinations.
Occult Innate Spells DC 19; 2nd darkness (at will), sound burst; Cantrips (2st) daze, ghost sound
Strangle [one-action] (attack, nonlethal) Requirement The dero must have two free hands, or be
wielding an aklys and have one hand free. Effect The dero attempts an Athletics check
to Grab with a +2 circumstance bonus. On a success, the target takes 1d6+6 bludgeoning
damage. Double the damage on a critical success.
Dero Magister
dero magisters are leaders among dero society. They perform the bulk of the cruel
operations and memory-altering procedures inflicted upon their victims.
DERO MAGISTER CREATURE 5
UNCOMMON CE SMALL DERO HUMANOID
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Undercommon
Skills Crafting +12, Medicine +8, Occultism +12, Stealth +11
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +3, Wis –1, Cha +5
Items aklys (see below)
AC 22, Fort +10, Ref +13, Will +10
HP 65; Immunities confusion; Weaknesses vulnerable
to sunlight
Vulnerable to Sunlight As dero stalker but 10 damage.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] aklys +10 (trip), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] aklys +13 (ranged trip, tethered, thrown 20
feet), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Occult Innate Spells DC 24; 4th modify memory; 2nd
darkness (at will), sound burst; Cantrips (1st) daze,
ghost sound
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 24; 3rd (3 slots)
blindness, vampiric touch; 2nd (4 slots) hideous
laughter, paranoia, spectral hand, touch of idiocy;
1st (4 slots) grim tendrils, magic missile, phantom pain, soothe;
Cantrips (3rd) chill touch, dancing lights, detect magic, forbidding ward,
message
Cytillesh Stare [one-action] (concentrate, incapacitation, mental, visual) Frequency
once per round; Effect The magister focuses their gaze on a creature they
can see within 30 feet. The target is dazzled for 1 round and must succeed
at a DC 24 Will saving throw or be confused for 1 round.
Aklyses
The aklys is a throwing club with a hook on one end and a lengthy cord attached
to the other. It is an uncommon advanced melee weapon in the club group. It deals
1d6 bludgeoning damage and has 1 Bulk. It requires one hand to use and has the
ranged trip, tethered, thrown 20 feet, and trip weapon traits; the new traits are
described below. Though aklyses aren’t available in most shops, one might be
purchased for 5 gp from a vendor that specializes in strange weapons.
Ranged Trip: This weapon can be used to Trip with the Athletics skill at a distance
up to the weapon’s first range increment. The skill check takes a –2 circumstance
penalty. You can add the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls as a bonus to the
check. As with using a melee weapon to trip, a ranged trip doesn’t deal any damage
when used to Trip. This trait usually only appears on a thrown weapon.
Tethered: This weapon is attached to a length of rope or chain that allows you
to retrieve it after it has left your hand. If you have a free hand while wielding
this weapon, you can use an Interact action to pull the weapon back into your
grasp after you have thrown it as a ranged attack or after it has been disarmed
(unless it is being held by another creature).
D
87

86
Devil
Masters of corruption and architects of conquest, devils seek both to tempt mortal
life to join in their pursuit of all things profane and to spread tyranny throughout
all worlds. The temptations they offer mortals range from great powers granted
by the signing of an infernal contract to twisted favors following a whispered
pledge to a diabolic patron, or any number of even subtler exchanges. Those who
succumb to these temptations find themselves consigned to an afterlife of endless
torment in the pits of Hell, wherein the only hope of escape lies in the chance of
being promoted to become a devil in the infernal ranks. Every devil has a specific
role to play in the upkeep of the remorseless bureaucratic machine that is Hell,
from soldiers and scholars to inquisitors, lawyers, judges, and executioners. Lowly
lemures and imps perform subservient labor to more powerful and specialized
devils, such as contract devils and erinyes, while the greatest pit fiends command
entire infernal armies.
Lemure
These shapeless masses of quivering flesh are the least of devilkind. Pathetic creatures
from Hell’s first layer, lemures roam alongside damned and suffering souls. Pit
fiends can combine the essence of a mob of lemures to concentrate their collective
wickedness with a single form, granting it an infernal sentience and transforming it
into a more powerful devil (see the pit fiend’s Devil Shaping ability).
LEMURE CREATURE 0
LE MEDIUM DEVIL FIEND MINDLESS
Perception +0; greater darkvision
Skills Athletics +5
Str +2, Dex +0, Con +3 Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –3
AC 13; Fort +10, Ref +5, Will +3
HP 20; Immunities fire, mental; Weaknesses
good 3; Resistances physical 3 (except
silver), poison 5
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +7 (evil, magical), Damage
1d4+2 slashing plus 1 evil
Subservience Lemures have little
drive of their own, but other devils
can take command of them. A nonlemure devil can issue a command
to all lemures within 60 feet of it
with a single action, which has the
auditory and concentrate traits. The devil
picks one of the following orders lemures can understand, and the
lemures follow that order. The command and its effects end once
the commander is out of the lemure’s sight, a new command is
issued by the same or another devil, or the lemure dies.
• Kill The lemure attacks one target the commander
singles out and gains a +1 circumstance bonus to attack
rolls against the target.
• Defend The lemure circles the commander and
attacks any creature that comes near. It gains a +1
circumstance bonus to AC and saves.
• Fetch The lemure gains a +10–foot circumstance
bonus to its Speed and attempts to get an object
or person the commander singles out. It attacks
anyone and anything that gets in the way.
• Work The lemure performs drudge work
dictated by the commander.
DIABOLIC DIVINITIES
Many unique and powerful devils
hold positions of power in Hell.
The most numerous of these are
the infernal dukes, many of whom
were promoted to this position
from already impressive statures
as pit fiends. The supreme ruler of
Hell itself is Asmodeus, the Prince
of Darkness. Between these two
tiers rule the eight archdevils-see
the sidebar on the facing page.
D
87

86
ARCHDEVILS
At any one time, eight archdevils
rule the eight upper layers of Hell,
while the deepest layer is ruled
by Asmodeus. Each archdevil is a
unique demigod with a dedicated
role in guiding the infernal machine
forward. Barbatos is the doorwarden
of Hellʼs uppermost layer, while
Dispater rules Hellʼs largest city.
Mammon guards Hellʼs treasuries,
and Belial designs new weapons
for Hellʼs legions. Geryon is the
oldest archdevil and keeper of many
secrets, while Moloch leads Hellʼs
armies. Baalzebul is a brooding
archdevil who has fallen from
Asmodeusʼs favor, while mighty
Mephistopheles was formed from
the plane of Hell itself.
Imp
Imps are infiltrators and corruptors who, despite their diminutive stature, are
more than capable of subtly influencing a weak-willed individual into performing
increasingly evil acts over time. An imp will often agree to serve a mortal and
act docile and loyal in a long-term plot to eventually damn its master’s soul to
Hell. Imps are born directly from Hell itself, rather than from mortal souls, and
thus they serve outside the usual diabolic hierarchy, granting them leeway to
pursue their specialties. Despite standing a mere 2-feet tall, imps can be vicious
combatants, flying out of reach and turning invisible to escape should the odds
turn against them.
IMP CREATURE 1
LE TINY DEVIL FIEND
Perception +7; greater darkvision
Languages Common, Infernal; telepathy (touch)
Skills Acrobatics +7, Arcana +6, Deception +7, Religion +5
Str –1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 17; Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 15; Immunities fire; Weaknesses good 3; Resistances physical 3 (except silver),
poison 5
Speed 20 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] stinger +9 (agile, evil, finesse, magical), Damage 1d4–1 piercing plus 1d4 evil
and imp venom
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th read omens; 2nd invisibility (at will, self only); 1st charm,
detect alignment (at will, good only); Cantrips (1st) detect magic
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
• Boar size Medium; scent (imprecise) 30 feet; Speed 40 feet; Melee tusk +9 (finesse),
Damage 1d10–1 piercing
• Giant Spider size Medium; Speed
25 feet, climb 25 feet; Melee
fangs +9 (finesse, poison),
Damage 1d6–1 piercing plus
1d4 poison
• Rat scent; Speed 20 feet;
Melee jaws +9 (agile, finesse),
Damage 1 piercing
• Raven scent; Speed 10 feet, fly
40 feet; Melee beak +9 (finesse),
Damage 1 piercing
Diabolic Healing [one-action] (concentrate,
divine, healing, necromancy);
Frequency once per round. Effect
The imp regains 1d6 Hit Points.
Imp Venom (poison); Saving Throw
DC 16 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison and clumsy
1 (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison damage,
clumsy 1, and slowed 1 (1 round)
Infernal Temptation [one-action] (divine, concentrate,
enchantment, evil, fortune); Frequency
once per day. Effect The imp offers a non-fiend
within 15 feet a bargain, granting a boon of good
luck if the creature accepts. The boon lasts for 1 hour once
accepted. If the creature dies while the boon is in place, its soul
travels to Hell, where it is bound for eternity and unable to be raised
or resurrected except by wish or similar magic. Once during the hour, the
creature can roll an attack roll or saving throw twice and use the higher result.
D
89

88
FIENDISH RELATIONS
Devils view daemonsʼ constant
hunt for souls as a short-sighted
waste of potential, and demonsʼ
chaotic destruction of society
and flesh as uncivilized and
obnoxious, but they do not loathe
their fiendish counterparts.
Indeed, most devils are more
than willing to take advantage
of daemons and demons as they
can to further their
own machinations.
Barbazu (Bearded Devil)
Barbazus, known also as bearded devils or infantry devils, are murderous fiends
who satiate their lust for annihilation by serving as the foot soldiers of Hell’s
armies, often leading hordes of lesser devils such as imps and lemures into
battle. Bearded devils wield serrated glaives to inflict jagged gashes that resist
healing magic, resulting in tremendous blood loss. When enemies come too
close, bearded devils strike with the spines of their wriggling beards to deliver
a wretched contagion called Avernal fever, savoring the sight of their victim’s
strength being slowly devoured from within.
Barbazus can be found savagely indulging the whims of evil infernal lords
from all layers of Hell, rejoicing as they
disseminate murder, misery, and anguish
as they see fit.
BARBAZU CREATURE 5
LE MEDIUM DEVIL FIEND
Perception +13; greater darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic,
Infernal; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics
+13, Intimidation +10, Religion +11,
Stealth +11
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +2,
Cha +1
Items glaive
AC 22; Fort +15, Ref +11, Will +11; +1 status to all
saves vs. magic
HP 60; Immunities fire; Weaknesses good 5; Resistances
physical 5 (except silver), poison 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] glaive +15 (deadly 1d8, evil, forceful, magical, reach 10
feet), Damage 1d8+7 slashing plus 2d6 evil and infernal wound
Melee [one-action] claw +15 (agile, evil, magical), Damage 2d6+7 slashing
plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] beard +15 (magical), Damage 1d6+7 piercing plus
Avernal fever
Divine Innate Spells DC 19; 5th dimension door; 4th dimension door (at will)
Rituals DC 19; infernal pact
Avernal Fever (disease); Saving Throw DC 23 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with
no ill effect (1 day); Stage 2 enfeebled 1 (1 day); Stage 3 enfeebled 2 (1 day)
Infernal Wound (divine, necromancy) A bearded devil’s glaive Strike also deals 1d6
persistent bleed damage that resists attempts to heal it. The flat check to stop the
bleeding starts at DC 20. The DC is reduced to 15 only if the bleeding creature or
an ally successfully assists with the recovery.
The DC to Administer First Aid to a creature with an infernal
wound is increased by 5. A spellcaster or item attempting to
use healing magic on a creature suffering from an infernal
wound must succeed at a DC 21 counteract check or the
magic fails to heal the creature.
Reposition [free-action] Trigger The devil hits a creature with a glaive
Strike. Effect The devil moves the creature 5 feet in any
direction. The destination square must be within reach of the
devil’s glaive. This movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
Wriggling Beard [one-action] Frequency once per round. Effect The barbazu makes a beard
Strike. This Strike ignores their multiple attack penalty and doesn’t count toward
that penalty.
D
89

88
DIABOLIC LOCATIONS
The nine layers of Hell are the
planar home of all devils, and
they much prefer its tyrannically
ordered environs to anywhere else
in the multiverse. Yet devils can
be encountered anywhere mortals
can be tempted by infernal
bargains or seek diabolic aid. On
Golarion, the nation of Cheliax is
particularly aligned with Hell. Its
government is based upon Hellʼs
organization, and the state church
is that of Asmodeus.
Erinys (Fury Devil)
Erinyes exact vengeance and bloody justice for a creature’s crimes, torturing
and punishing their victims in ironic fashion before allowing them the escape
of death. While an erinys appears as a fallen angel and the first erinyes shared
that origin, erinyes now originate in myriad ways, some promoted from lesser
devils and others shaped from lemures themselves forged from the souls of
torturers and persecutors. The erinyes’ origin is entwined with Eiseth, herself a
fallen angel and one of Hell’s most powerful demigods. The first erinyes were all
considered to be Eiseth’s metaphorical daughters, but erinyes formed since that
time are no longer limited to a single gender.
ERINYS CREATURE 8
LE MEDIUM DEVIL FIEND
Perception +18; greater darkvision, true seeing
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +17, Crafting +14, Deception +19,
Diplomacy +15, Intimidation +19, Religion +16,
Stealth +17
Str +5, Dex +5, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +5
Items breastplate, +1 striking composite longbow
(60 arrows), longsword, 100 feet of erinys-hair rope
AC 27; Fort +17, Ref +19, Will +16; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 120; Immunities fire; Weaknesses good 5; Resistances physical
5 (except silver), poison 10
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] flaming longsword +19 (evil, fire, magical, versatile P),
Damage 1d8+8 slashing plus 1d6 evil and 1d6 fire
Ranged [one-action] flaming composite longbow +20 (deadly 1d10, evil, fire,
magical, range increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley 30 feet),
Damage 2d8+4 piercing plus 1d6 evil and 1d6 fire
Ranged [one-action] rope +19 (magical, range increment 30 feet),
Effect rope snare
Divine Innate Spells DC 26; 5th dimension door; 4th
dimension door (at will), divine wrath, retributive
pain (Core Rulebook 396); 3rd fear (at
will), 2nd illusory object, illusory disguise
(at will); Constant (6th) true seeing
Rituals DC 26; infernal pact
Flames of Fury Any weapon an erinys holds gains the effects of a
flaming rune while they hold it.
Furious Fusillade [three-actions] The erinys hovers in place if they are
flying and fires one arrow at any number of creatures in a
30-foot cone. Each attack is rolled separately. This counts as
one attack for the purpose of the erinys’s multiple attack penalty.
Rope Snare An erinys carries a coil of rope woven of their hair (use
the statistics for rope) that animates in their hands. When a creature is
hit by the erinys’s rope, a segment of the rope tears loose and wraps itself
around the creature, imposing a 10–foot circumstance penalty to Speed. The
piece that tears off is 10 feet long for a Medium or smaller creature, and doubles in
length for each size larger than Medium. When a creature Escapes the effect (DC 26),
the detached segment of rope withers away into useless black sludge.
Phistophilus (Contract Devil)
Contract devils are clerks, scribes, and bureaucrats of Hell rarely found outside
the infernal courts, and then almost always to pursue potential contracts,
tempting mortals to sell their souls in exchange for achieving their worldly
desires. If a target is desirable enough, a phistophilus can offer contracts for 
D
91

90
INFERNAL CONTRACTS
The infernal contracts created by
contract devils are not the only
ways a devil can engage a mortal in
a binding agreement, but they are
the most convenient. Other devils
must perform complex rituals or
jump through bureaucratic hoops to
organize a contract with a mortal,
and in most cases the easiest
solution for devils in this situation
is to simply enlist the aid of a
contract devil.
prices seemingly lesser than their soul all at once, though in this case, the devil
carefully manipulates the price to drive the signatory toward the forces of
law and evil, and therefore ultimately to Hell anyway. Contract devils are tall
creatures with skin tones that range from bronze to crimson and large curving
horns extending from their bodies, over which they often drape favored or
important contracts.
PHISTOPHILUS CREATURE 10
LE MEDIUM DEVIL FIEND
Perception +21; greater darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Aklo, Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal, Undercommon;
telepathy 100 feet, tongues
Skills Arcana +19, Deception +23, Diplomacy +21, Intimidation +21, Legal Lore +25,
Religion +19, Society +19, Stealth +18
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +4, Int +7, Wis +5, Cha +5
AC 30; Fort +18, Ref +18, Will +23; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 150; Immunities fire, ward contract; Weaknesses good 10; Resistances physical
10 (except silver), poison 10
Ward Contract A signed contract carried by a living contract devil (including
draped over its horns) is immune to damage from all creatures other than
that contract devil. A contract devil is immune to mental effects that would
make it destroy, nullify, or alter a contract.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] binding contract +23 (agile, disarm, evil, magical, reach 10 feet, trip),
Damage 3d6+11 slashing plus 1d6 evil, Grab, and infernal wound
Melee [one-action] horn +21 (magical), Damage 3d10+11 piercing and
infernal wound
Divine Innate Spells DC 31; 10th scrying (at will, see infernal
investment) 7th plane shift; 5th dimension door, fireball,
illusory scene, lightning bolt, locate (at will), mind probe,
sending (at will); 4th dimension door (at will), private
sanctum, silence; 3rd mind reading (at will); Cantrips
(7th) detect magic; Constant (5th) tongues
Rituals DC 31; infernal pact
Draft Contract [three-actions] (conjuration, divine, manipulate)
The contract devil produces an infernal contract for
a single living mortal. This contract can grant a wide
range of abilities and effects, akin to the power of a
wish spell but fulfilled to the letter by the contract
devil. To receive any of those benefits, the mortal must
willingly sign its true name to the contract. At that
point, the mortal’s soul is bound to the contract devil
and Hell.
While the contract is in effect, the victim can’t be
restored to life except by wish or similar magic. If
the mortal is restored to life by those means, the
contract devil knows which mortal came to life and
can locate the creature or creatures who restored
the mortal to life for 1 year, gaining the effects of a
locate spell with unlimited range. Avoiding the terms
of an infernal contract is difficult and often dangerous.
Infernal Investment A contract devil can cast a 10th-level innate scrying spell
at will, but only to target a creature with which it has a contract. The target
automatically critically fails its save.
Infernal Wound (divine, necromancy) As barbazu, but the
persistent bleed damage is 3d6, and the counteract DC to
use healing magic is 29.
D
91

90
FIRE AND ICE
The classic depiction of Hell
is of a burning wasteland of
magma and volcanoes, a searing
landscape rife with the screaming
souls of the damned. Yet those
who have visited Hell know the
awful truth-for its torments do
not cease at eternal burning.
Some regions of hell are perpetual
frozen reaches of razor-sharp ice
and flesh-scouring wind, while
others are miasmic swamps filled
with poison and disease. Hell does
not limit its torturous toolbox
merely to the fires for which it is
so well known!
Gelugon (Ice Devil)
Insectile ice devils are strategists and masterminds in Hell’s armies, using their
superior intellect to strike against their enemies and spread Hell’s influence
throughout the planes. An ice devil rarely breaks their solitary contemplation of
strategy save to pursue a plan they have devised. They can be enticed otherwise
only by an exchange of services to be determined at a later time, adding to
the pieces they can play on the board. Occasionally, a mortal strategist of
outstanding skill might amuse an ice devil enough for the gelugon to agree to
a contest of strategy, typically a strategic board game like chess, to decide a
dispute. In the unlikely event the devil loses such a contest, they inevitably go to
great lengths to later obtain that mortal’s services for their own infernal ends.
GELUGON CREATURE 13
LE LARGE DEVIL FIEND
Perception +26; greater darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +22, Athletics +23, Deception +25, Diplomacy +25, Intimidation +23,
Religion +26, Society +25, Stealth +22, Warfare Lore +30
Str +6, Dex +5, Con +5, Int +8, Wis +5, Cha +4
Items +1 striking longspear
AC 34; Fort +24, Ref +24, Will +26; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215; Immunities cold, fire; Weaknesses good 10; Resistances physical 10
(except silver), poison 10
Frightful Presence (aura, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, mental) 10 feet, DC 31
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 35 feet, fly 35 feet (from fly)
Melee [one-action] frost longspear +28 (cold, evil, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+12 piercing
plus 1d6 cold, 1d6 evil, and slowing frost
Melee [one-action] tail +25 (agile, cold, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+12 bludgeoning
plus 2d6 cold, 1d6 evil, and slowing frost
Ranged [one-action] frost longspear
+27 (cold, magical, thrown
20 feet), Damage 2d8+12
piercing plus 1d6 cold
Divine Innate Spells DC 33; 7th cone of cold
(×2); 6th illusory scene; 5th dimension door, wall
of ice (×3); 4th dimension door (at will); Cantrips
(7th) ray of frost; Constant (4th) fly
D
93

92
DEVIL SHAPING
A pit fiend needs a minimum
number of lemures in order to
shape the roiling mass into a
devil of a particular level, as
summarized below.
Devil Level
Number of
Lemures
4 or below 4
5–6 8
7–8 16
9–10 32
11–12 64
13–14 128
15–16 256
17–18 512
19–20 1,024
Rituals DC 33; infernal pact
Slowing Frost (cold, divine, evocation) The ice devil channels the extreme cold of its
body through its appendages and weapons. A creature hit by an ice devil’s weapon
or unarmed attack in melee must attempt a DC 32 Fortitude save or be slowed 1 for
1d4 rounds. A weapon used by an ice devil gains the effects of a frost rune while the
gelugon holds it, and the ice devil can throw any such weapon with a 20-foot range
increment, trailing motes of frost.
Tactician of Cocytus [one-action] (concentrate) An ice devil’s logical mind devises genius tactics
from its perfect memory. It can telepathically send a tactical repositioning to its
allies, allowing all commanded or allied evil creatures in the range of its telepathy
to immediately Stride (or Burrow, Climb, Fly, or Swim, if the creature has the
corresponding Speed).
Pit Fiend (Tyrant Devil)
When an army of devils invades to bathe a region in bloodshed and hellfire, it
is likely that one of Hell’s most powerful and diabolical generals, the pit fiend,
masterminded the incursion. Cunning, powerful, and ruthless, pit fiends often
serve the archdevils directly. They rule infernal duchies, subjugate mortal worlds,
and usurp infernal rivals using unparalleled despotism and calculated ferocity. To
realize their tyrannical machinations, pit fiends claim mortal souls that they corrupt
into lemure servants, which can then be shaped and transformed through infernal
manipulation into the terrifying devils that form Hell’s formidable legions. They
often select the most wicked and vicious lemures for their armies, drawing upon
these lesser devils’ depravity during powerful magical ceremonies to create hideous
and terrifying abominations that can cow and eviscerate the pit fiend’s enemies.
Pit fiends themselves are crafted deep within the nightmarish bowels of Nessus,
the ninth layer of Hell, to serve the whims of archdevils and infernal dukes.
Those pit fiends that don’t leave Nessus to command infernal legions in the upper
layers of Hell often form the courts of Hell’s elite, gathering cabals and sects that
shape Hell’s political landscape through subterfuge and manipulation. But many
pit fiends see themselves as living embodiments of hellfire, the all-encompassing
wrath of Hell, and thus prefer to dwell in realms consumed by fire. In Avernus,
Dis, Malebolge, Nessus, and Phlegethon, pit fiends build vast citadels of brimstone
wreathed in flame to lord over.
Pit fiends tower over other devils, standing at least 16 feet tall, weighing over
1,000 pounds, and brandishing wingspans in excess of 20 feet.
Infernal Dukes
Elite members of Hell’s political infrastructure and leadership hierarchy, the
dukes of Hell are chosen from among the most tyrannical, oppressive, and
conniving devils. While not all infernal dukes are pit fiends, a pit fiend’s natural
disposition toward conquest and oppression often make it an ideal candidate
for this position. To create an infernal duke, adjust the pit fiend to be between
21st and 25th level. Because of their physical prowess, manipulative nature, and
powerful spellcasting abilities, infernal dukes make excellent villains for longrunning campaigns.
PIT FIEND CREATURE 20
LE LARGE DEVIL FIEND
Perception +37; greater darkvision, true seeing
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic, Infernal; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +34, Arcana +32, Athletics +33, Deception +39, Diplomacy +34,
Intimidation +39, Religion +37, Society +36, Stealth +34
Str +9, Dex +8, Con +9, Int +8, Wis +9, Cha +8
AC 46; Fort +37, Ref +32, Will +35; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 335, regeneration 30 (deactivated by good); Immunities fire; Weaknesses good 15;
Resistances physical 15 (except silver), poison 15
D
93

92
OTHER DEVILS
The devils presented on these
pages are a small sampling of the
torments Hell has to offer. Other
devils, like the inquisition-focused
bone devils, the cherub-faced and
fly-bodied accuser devils, and the
aquatic drowning devil are a few
examples of these widespread
immortal creatures.
Commander’s Aura (aura, divine, enchantment) 100 feet. Commanded or allied evil
creatures in the aura of lower level than the pit fiend gain a +1 circumstance bonus to
attack rolls, damage rolls, AC, saves, and skill checks.
Frightful Presence (aura, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, mental) 20 feet, DC 42
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] The pit fiend can make an Attack of Opportunity when a
creature within reach uses a concentrate action, in addition to the usual trigger. The
devil can disrupt triggering concentrate actions, and they disrupt actions on any hit,
not only a critical hit.
Speed 35 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +40 (evil, magical, poison, reach 10 feet), Damage 4d10+17 piercing plus
2d6 evil and pit fiend venom
Melee [one-action] claw +38 (agile, evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 4d6+17 slashing plus 2d6 evil
Melee [one-action] tail +36 (evil, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 4d10+17 bludgeoning plus 2d6
evil and Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] wing +36 (evil, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d6+17 slashing plus 2d6 evil
Divine Innate Spells DC 42; 10th meteor swarm, miracle (once per year), power word
stun; 9th bind soul (at will); 8th dispel magic (at will), divine decree (at will), fireball
(at will), scrying, wall of fire (at will); 5th dimension door; 4th dimension door (at
will); Constant (8th) true seeing
Rituals DC 42; infernal pact
Constrict [one-action] 2d10+17 bludgeoning plus 2d6 evil, DC 43
Devil Shaping (divine, downtime, transmutation) The pit
fiend reshapes a large number of lemures within a
600-foot radius into more powerful devils to swell
Hell’s legions. The pit fiend must have available
the number of lemures listed on the table in the
sidebar on page 92. The pit fiend can shape 100
lemures per day, to a maximum of 1,100 lemures
in 11 days. Devils created in this way are in
thrall to the pit fiend and follow its orders,
with the exception of created pit fiends or
other devils of similar power, which are
always independent. As a result, few pit
fiends choose to create peers. At the
end of the Devil Shaping activity, the
pit fiend attempts an incredibly hard
Religion check of the desired devilʼs level,
with results as follows.
Critical Success The pit fiend shapes
two devils from the massed lemures
instead of one.
Success The pit fiend shapes a devil of the
desired type and level.
Failure The devil shaped from the lemures is
2 levels lower than the intended devil.
Critical Failure The pit fiend fails to shape
any devils and draws the ire of an archdevil
for its waste of resources.
Fast Swoop [one-action] The pit fiend Flies and makes a wing
Strike at any point during its movement.
Masterful Quickened Casting [free-action] (concentrate); Frequency once per round.
Effect If the pit fiendʼs next action is to cast an 8th-level or lower innate
spell, reduce the number of actions to cast it by 1 (minimum 1 action).
Pit Fiend Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 43 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 10 rounds; Stage 1 6d6 poison damage and drained 1 (1
round); Stage 2 7d6 poison damage and drained 2 (1 round); Stage 3 8d6
poison damage and drained 3 (1 round)
D
95

94
DEZULLON VENOM
The dezullon is most well known
for the psychoactive effects of
its secretions. Affected creatures
suffer amnesia, briefly forgetting
where they are and why they are
in pain. Some creatures, desperate
to escape the past, willingly
expose themselves to a dezullon’s
amnesia venom in an effort to
make their painful memories fade.
Dezullon
Dezullons are dangerous carnivorous pitcher plants that dwell in forested
regions with thick canopies. They hunt for meat along the forest’s understory
when not sunning themselves in the boughs above. Dezullons are smart enough
to notice that some creatures are attracted by shiny things, and sometimes use
such objects to set up ambushes. To assume that the dezullon’s ambulations are
slow simply because the creature has a root structure is a foolish mistake; many
an adventurer has been crushed to death by this surprisingly agile plant. In
addition, these dangerous plants are expert climbers, making their pursuit even
more difficult to escape from.
A hungry dezullon keeps prey off-balance by spilling its putrid, psychoactive
digestive juices from its central pitcher. In addition to being highly acidic, the
enzymes in a dezullon’s digestive tract, once expelled, inflict a victim with powerful
hallucinations and amnesia. This secondary effect makes dezullons highly sought
after in some circles, including avid drug users, experimental doctors, and
criminals who deal in poisons.
Many varieties of dezullon exist, including lumbering giants of
incredible size, those that have tiny, cup-shaped pitchers that
proliferate along lengths of creeping ivy like suckers on a squid’s
tentacles, and others with hundreds of blood-red, razor-sharp
leaves that protrude from the inside of their pitchers like
a leech’s teeth. This latter variety is especially dangerous,
since the leaves can all but eviscerate creatures that become
ensconced inside their pitchers.
DEZULLON CREATURE 10
N MEDIUM PLANT
Perception +18; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +21, Athletics +19, Stealth +21 (+24 in forests or swamps)
Str +5, Dex +7, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 30; Fort +17, Ref +21, Will +16
HP 130, regeneration 15 (deactivated by fire); Resistances acid 20
Stench (aura, olfactory) 30 feet. A creature entering the emanation must
attempt a DC 27 Fortitude save. On a failure, the creature is sickened 1, and
on a critical failure is also slowed 1. While within the aura, the creature
takes a –2 circumstance penalty to saves to
recover from the sickened condition. A
creature that succeeds at the save is
temporarily immune to this effect for
1 minute.
Speed 25 feet; climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] vine +21 (acid, agile),
Damage 3d6+8 bludgeoning plus
3d6 acid and Grab
Ranged [one-action] acid glob +23 (acid, range
30 feet), Damage 4d8 acid plus
amnesia venom
Amnesia Venom (mental, poison); Saving Throw
DC 29 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage
1 flat-footed (1 round); Stage 2 flat-footed and clumsy 1
(1 round); Stage 3 confused, flat-footed, and clumsy 2 (1 round).
Constrict [one-action] 2d6+2 bludgeoning
Root [one-action] (concentrate) Until the next time it acts, the dezullon
appears to be a normal pitcher plant. It has an
automatic result of 41 (44 in forests or swamps)
on Deception checks and DCs to pass as a
non-creature plant.
D
95

94
DHAMPIR LOCATIONS
Most dhampirs make their homes
in urban areas, though some more
reclusive individuals claim ruins or
dungeons as their domains.
Dhampir
As the mortal offspring of a vampire and a living parent, dhampirs occupy an
unusual place among the living. Their vampiric parentage lends them elongated
incisors, an unearthly beauty and physical grace, a ghostly pallor, and a piercing
gaze. Perhaps their most distinctive feature, however, is their connection to
negative energy, which heals them, leaving them as vulnerable to positive energy
as any undead creature. Though they don’t suffer the full range of a vampire’s
vulnerabilities, they do share certain characteristics with their vampire parent,
leading to several distinct dhampir heritages across Golarion. By far the most
common dhampirs are svetocher, the children of the more common moroi vampires.
Many dhampirs lived their childhoods as orphans, often because their mortal
parents believed their child to be cursed and abandoned them, or perished
as a result of a difficult childbirth. Often outcast, some dhampirs leverage
their charisma and personal magnetism to manipulate those around them,
while others struggle to form relationships. Frequent mistrust of a dhampir’s
parentage present further challenges when dhampirs attempt to integrate into
mortal society. Those who seek out their vampiric parent instead often find
themselves considered inferior, rejected as they were with regular mortals
but for different reasons. But in regions like Nidal, Geb, and Ustalav, where
vampires themselves carry some degree of respect, dhampirs can sometimes find
their heritage empowering.
Dhampirs fill countless roles within many communities. Some prefer to blend in
as best they can, holding regular jobs and building families (most children born
to dhampirs share an ancestry with the dhampir’s mortal parent, but a rare few
are born as dhampirs themselves). Those who learn to make the most of their
inherited charm can achieve a high societal status, whether leveraging traditional
avenues of power or gathering followers enamored by the dhampir’s abilities.
With a lifespan rivaling that of an elf, a dhampir can develop extensive
influence and engage in long-reaching schemes of massive scope. Further, their
ancestry lends them a proclivity to necromancy and the occult arts.
Dhampir Wizard
This dhampir is a svetocher, the child of a moroi vampire.
DHAMPIR WIZARD CREATURE 2
NE MEDIUM DHAMPIR HUMAN HUMANOID
Perception +4; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +7, Arcana +8, Deception +5, Intimidation +5, Society +8, Stealth
+7, Vampire Lore +8
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +0, Cha +1
Items dagger, spellbook containing their prepared spells, staff
AC 17; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +6; +2 circumstance to all saves vs. disease
HP 22, negative healing
Blood of the Night The dhampir’s penalty and Hit Point reduction
from the drained condition are reduced as though the
condition value were 1 lower.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dagger +7 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage
1d4+2 piercing
Melee [one-action] staff +6 (two-handed d8), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] fist +7 (agile, finesse, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+2
bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] dagger +7 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+2 piercing
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 18, attack +8; 1st command, grim tendrils (×2),
magic missile; Cantrips (1st) chill touch, detect magic, prestidigitation, ray
of frost, shield
D
97

96
DINOSAURS IN FANTASY
At first glance, the inclusion of
dinosaurs in a fantasy setting
might seem strange, but dinosaurs
are an excellent creature to use
in a game that bridges the gap
between familiar real-world
animals and legendary monsters.
If having dinosaurs mix freely with
lions, manticores, and dragons still
seems strange to you, consider
having them dwell in remote,
primeval lands, as suggested in
the sidebars on pages 99–100.
On Golarion, dinosaurs do exist in
the wilder regions of the world,
particularly on the continent of
Garund, though they are common
enough that PCs might find some
on display in a menagerie in a
northern city, in use as guardian
creatures, or even kept by druids
as loyal animal companions.
Dinosaur
Remnants from the world’s primeval era, these enormous reptilian animals still
exist in large numbers in isolated and remote wildernesses or far underground
within magical Darklands caverns. Lizardfolk, orcs, giants, and other monstrous
humanoids sometimes use dinosaurs as mounts, guards, or hunting animals.
Humans and other ancestries have also been known to collect dinosaurs, be it
to display them in menageries or keep them as exotic pets or guardians. Such
activities are generally pursuits of the rich or eccentric, but certain druids and
other guardians of nature feel strong kinships with dinosaurs as well and take
them on as companions. When dinosaurs establish themselves in regions beyond
their normal habitats, it is generally the result of these captive creatures escaping
into the wild.
Velociraptor
A smaller cousin of the deinonychus, the velociraptor is a swift, cunning
pack hunter. It has no fear of larger creatures, and a group of these dinosaurs
won’t hesitate to attack creatures the size of a horse. Velociraptors are social
animals, and tend to live in groups of up to a dozen other velociraptors. They
have manes of feathery plumage that extend down their backs and along the
sides of their arms, legs, and tail, while their underbellies and flanks are scaly.
These feathers allow them to blend into their natural terrains with ease, but
when excited, attempting to intimidate, or seeking a mate, a velociraptor can
puff and frill this plumage to expose much brighter colors normally covered
by the longer feathers. A typical velociraptor is 1-1/2
feet tall, 7 feet long, and weighs 35 pounds.
VELOCIRAPTOR CREATURE 1
N SMALL ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +6; low-light vision, scent
(imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +5 (+8
jumping), Stealth +6
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 16; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 20
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +8 (finesse), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+3 slashing
Leaping Charge [one-action] The velociraptor Strides up to 10 feet,
ignoring difficult terrain as it leaps over obstacles. It then
makes a Strike with its talons, gaining a +1 circumstance
bonus to its attack roll.
Pack Attack The velociraptor deals 1d4 extra damage
to any creature that’s within reach of at least two of the
velociraptor’s allies.
Deinonychus
Deinonychuses are wily hunters that attack in groups of up to a dozen
individuals, ripping apart their prey with sharp talons and powerful jaws. They
are lean and muscular, and have two powerful legs and a long tail that helps
them maintain balance. Although deinonychuses don’t use their dexterous
clawed forelimbs to attack, the dinosaurs can use them to pull aside
small barriers. Although some of these dinosaurs have scaly skin, most
have thatches of vibrantly colored feathers as well. A deinonychus is
about 6 feet tall and weighs about 150 pounds.
However, larger deinonychuses exist. These creatures-which stand
taller than a human-are called megaraptors.
D
97

96
DINOSAUR RESOURCES
As animals, dinosaurs have little
interest in treasure (although
velociraptors and deinonychuses,
like their bird cousins, enjoy
keeping sparkling baubles in
their nests), but the remains of
adventurers strewn about their
lairs often still have valuable gear.
Dinosaurs can also be harvested
for rare and valuable trophies such
as teeth, talons, armor plates, and
the like.
DEINONYCHUS CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +7 Athletics +9 (+12 jumping), Stealth +7
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +2
AC 19; Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +5
HP 30
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +9, Damage 2d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +9 (agile), Damage 1d6+3 slashing plus 1d4 bleed
Darting Attack [one-action] The deinonychus Strides up to 10 feet and then makes a Strike, or
makes a Strike and then Strides up to 10 feet.
Predator’s Advantage Bleeding creatures are flat-footed to the deinonychus.
Ankylosaurus
Squat, heavily armored quadrupeds, ankylosauruses are stubborn and irascible.
Although they’re herbivores, they have been known to attack other creatures that
trespass within territory simply out of ill temper.
Ankylosauruses have few natural predators, as their bony hides are covered in
spiked nubs that jut in many different directions to discourage larger creatures
from biting them. They have mighty tails ending in an immense knot of bone,
which they use to whip at threats with incredible speed and power. While these
low-to-the-ground dinosaurs can trample human-sized or smaller foes, their
relatively squat stance prevents them from doing so against larger targets. An
ankylosaurus is about 30 feet long, 10 feet tall at the shoulder, and weighs over
3 tons.
The ankylosaurus is the largest of the heavily armored dinosaurs called
ankylosaurids, but smaller versions exist as well. Still Large in size, these smaller
dinosaurs, such as the 16-foot long pinacosaurus, lack the trample ability and
are rarely above 4th level. Regardless of size, ankylosaurids tend to be relatively
muted in coloration, with mixes of black, brown, and gray. When captive, an
ankylosaurus’s keeper might paint its scales bright colors to signify to others
that is not a wild creature.
ANKYLOSAURUS CREATURE 6
N HUGE ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +12; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +17
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 26; Fort +16, Ref +10, Will +12
HP 90
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] tail +17 (backswing, reach 15 feet),
Damage 2d8+7 bludgeoning
plus punishing tail
Melee [one-action] foot +17 (reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d6+7 bludgeoning
Punishing Tail A creature
struck by the ankylosaurus’s
tail must attempt a DC 24
Fortitude save. On a failure,
it’s slowed 1 until the end of its
next turn; on a critical failure, it’s
stunned until the end of its
next turn.
Trample [three-actions] Medium or
smaller, foot, DC 24
D
99

98
Stegosaurus
The stegosaurus is easily recognized by its twin rows of diamond-shaped dorsal
plates that run down its spine, and thick tail adorned with four large spikes. This
strange configuration protects this herbivore from predators, as the stegosaurus
can hunker down to interpose its dorsal plates between an attacker and its thick
body. A stegosaurus defends itself by swinging its spiked tail at larger foes and
trampling smaller opponents underfoot.
The stegosaurus often inhabits grasslands, where nutritious vegetation is
plentiful and only its dorsal plates rise above waving fields of tall grass. The
stegosaurus is among the most curious of dinosaurs, and hunters often find it easy
to bait them with shiny trinkets or strange noises. A stegosaurus is about 30 feet
long, 16 feet high at the top of its highest dorsal plate, and weighs between 2 and
3 tons.
The stegosaurus is generally more even-tempered and even gentle, despite its
size, than the ankylosaurus. This combination makes it even more popular as
a trained pet or guard, but even then one should take care to not annoy the
dinosaur-an angry or annoyed stegosaurus can lash out with its tail with little
warning. Often, it’s wiser to train smaller variants, such as the kentrosaurus.
Regardless, their dorsal plates make this dinosaur a poor choice as a mount.
STEGOSAURUS CREATURE 7
N HUGE ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +15; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +20
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 23; Fort +17, Ref +13, Will +13
HP 125
Dorsal Deflection [reaction] Trigger The stegosaurus is targeted with a
melee attack. Effect The stegosaurus leans its dorsal plates into
the attack, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to its AC against the
triggering attack. If the attack misses, the stegosaurus Steps
after the attack.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (sweep, reach 15 feet), Damage
2d8+9 piercing
Melee [one-action] foot +18 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+9
bludgeoning
Trample [three-actions] Large or smaller, foot, DC 25
Triceratops
Triceratopses are muscular quadrupeds with powerful but short
legs, thick necks, and heads crowned by a wide, bony frill. Though
they bear a large horn on their snout and one on each brow, these
dinosaurs are herbivores and use these bony protrusions only
to defend themselves from attackers or in dramatic clashes
DINOSAUR GUARDIANS
As with most animals, dinosaurs
can be tamed or domesticated,
but the difficulty of this task
increases along with the dinosaur’s
level. Lizardfolk and orcs are fond
of using dinosaurs as beasts of
burden, workhorses, mounts,
or even war beasts. Certain
dinosaurs, such as velociraptors
and deinonychuses, make excellent
trackers as well. The largest and
most dangerous dinosaurs, such as
the tyrannosaurus, are generally
avoided, although more powerful
creatures like giants have been
known to be able to keep them
as pets, guardians, or even brutal
executioners. In certain cities,
dinosaurs are popularly featured
as combatants in blood sports and
other gladiatorial battles.
D
99

98
PRIMEVAL LANDS
Dinosaurs fit well into certain
types of settings. They’re
often found in isolated lands
like primeval jungle valleys or
plateaus-regions known as lost
worlds for their inaccessibility
and lack of any encroaching
civilization. In addition to
dinosaurs, other megafauna
can exist in these places as
well, along with giant insects or
aggressive creatures like bulettes,
carnivorous plants, chuuls, and
drakes. Such regions can make for
perilous and intriguing adventure
sites, especially if you combine
them with ruins of ancient
civilizations to explore once the
party has navigated the hostile
wilderness regions.
against other triceratopses for grazing territory or mates. Short-tempered and
obstinate, triceratopses are unlikely to back down from a fight unless they are
hopelessly outmatched, and the creatures are known to fight to the death for
no apparent reason beyond stubbornness. Triceratopses often serve as mounts
for lizardfolk, orcs, and giants, who ride comfortably behind the dinosaurs’
protective bone frills. A triceratops is 30 feet long and weighs as much as 10 tons.
Triceratopses are surely the most well-known of the dinosaurs known as
ceratopids, but many others exist. For example, the smaller styracosauruses
have only one horn but several horn-like protrusions on their frills.
TRICERATOPS CREATURE 8
N HUGE ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +16; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +21
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 26; Fort +18, Ref +12, Will +14
HP 140
Frill Defense [reaction] Trigger The rider is targeted with an attack. Requirements A creature
must be mounted on the triceratops. Effect The triceratops intercepts the attack
with its bony frill. The rider gains a +2 circumstance bonus to its AC against the
triggering attack.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] horns +19 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+9 piercing plus Knockdown
Melee [one-action] foot +19 (reach 10 feet), Damage
2d6+9 bludgeoning
Lumbering Charge [one-action] The triceratops Strides up to 10
feet and then makes a Strike.
Trample [three-actions] Large or
smaller, foot, DC 26
Vicious Gore A
triceratops deals
2d6 extra persistent
bleed damage to
prone targets it hits
with its horns.
Brontosaurus
Brontosauruses are truly gigantic
behemoths, plodding herbivores
large enough to be unafraid of all
but the most massive predators.
Brontosauruses have stout bodies
and long, sinuous necks ending in
small heads, allowing them to graze
from the highest treetops. Their powerful tails are equally
as long as their necks and provide counterbalances.
Brontosauruses bear their bulk upon four stout legs.
Although their feet are capable of crushing entire buildings,
these herbivores are generally peaceful and considerate of
where they step.
Most brontosauruses are dangerous only when defending
themselves or their young, or when panicked enough
to stampede. When roused in this way, however, the
creatures are truly terrifying: their muscular tails sweep
in great arcs and their massive feet crash down
heedlessly onto the ground. A brontosaurus is 70
feet long and weighs more than 30 tons.
D
101

100
HOLLOW WORLDS
Another classic place that
dinosaurs are found in fiction are
in “hollow worlds.” Some campaign
settings might not contain entire
isolated worlds within them, but
many, such as Golarion, have
expansive underground lands. The
deepest region of the Darklands
of Golarion-a realm called Orv-is
an optimal place to find a hollow
world. Typically infused with magic
that allows for jungles to grow
deep underground (and sometimes
even sunlike orbs that illuminate
the lands from above, simulating
a day-night cycle), areas such as
Deep Tolguth of Orv make perfect
places for dinosaurs to roam.
Brontosauruses belong to a group of dinosaurs known as sauropods, all of
which are immense in size. The brachiosaurus is among the tallest of these
dinosaurs, and the diplodocus among the longest, but it’s likely that even larger
behemoths exist.
BRONTOSAURUS CREATURE 10
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +16; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +23
Str +9, Dex +0, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +1
AC 28; Fort +21, Ref +14, Will +16
HP 220
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] tail +23 (sweep, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+13 bludgeoning plus
Improved Knockdown
Melee [one-action] foot +23 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+13 bludgeoning
Tail Sweep [two-actions] The brontosaurus makes a tail Strike and compares the attack roll to the
AC of up to three foes, each of whom must be within its tail’s melee reach and adjacent
to at least one other target. It rolls damage only once and applies it to each creature
hit. A Tail Sweep counts as two attacks for its multiple attack penalty.
Trample [three-actions] Huge or smaller, foot, DC 29
Tyrannosaurus
Widely regarded as the king of the dinosaurs, the tyrannosaurus is a massive
predator with a wide mouth filled with viciously sharp teeth. Thundering
beasts of fury and hunger, tyrannosauruses are bold and fearless carnivores
that eagerly bite off great hunks of large prey and swallow smaller prey-such
as most humanoids-in a single gulp. Although they can subsist on
carrion, tyrannosaurs prefer live prey.
Tyrannosauruses stand on two wide, powerful
hind legs that allow them to run quickly,
and their thick tails provide them with 
D
101

100
OTHER DINOSAURS
A wide range of dinosaurs are
presented on these pages, but any
trip to the movies, exploration
of dinosaur books, or a quick
online search reveals a wealth of
additional creatures that could fit
into your game as well. Armorheaded pachycephalosaurs,
spike-thumbed iguanodons,
duck-billed hadrosaurs, sail-backed
spinosauruses, and more await
discovery by those who would
seek out the mysteries of the lost
worlds where the thunder lizards
still rule!
exceptional balance. Although a their small forelimbs are of little use other
than to hold prey in place while the predators tear at their victim’s flesh with
their fearsome jaws, even these forelimbs bear sharp claws several inches long.
As fearsome as tyrannosauruses are alone, they sometimes hunt in packs to
take down massive prey. Only the most powerful creatures can successfully
train tyrannosauruses, and even then, only when they can provide the ravenous
beasts with a steady diet of meat.
Some tribes of giants, particularly cyclopes or more obscure denizens of
primeval lands, have even trained tyrannosauruses as mounts or beasts of
war. In other places, xulgaths feed these prisoners to these mighty dinosaurs
as part of executions or ritual sacrifices. Some xulgath cults even revere
tyrannosaurs as incarnations of their violent demonic demigods. For their
part, tyrannosaurs who have grown used to having their meals provided in
this manner are remarkably well-behaved toward their feeders and keepers.
Tyrannosauruses are 50 feet long and weigh 7 tons or more.
Other variants of the tyrannosaurs include slightly smaller dinosaurs such
as the allosaurus, or even larger dinosaurs like the ravenous giganotosaurus.
Even the smallest tyrannosaurs, such as the nanotyrannus, are never smaller
than Large in size, yet despite this smaller stature, they are no less ferocious,
and those who would assume that a nanotyrannus is "safer" to train would
do well to think again!
TYRANNOSAURUS CREATURE 10
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL DINOSAUR
Perception +19; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +24
Str +8, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 29; Fort +21, Ref +15, Will +19
HP 180
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +22
(deadly 1d12, reach
20 feet), Damage
2d12+12 piercing plus
Grab
Melee [one-action] foot +22 (reach
15 feet), Damage 2d10+12
bludgeoning
Fling [one-action] Requirements A
creature is Grabbed in
the tyrannosaurus’s jaws.
Effect The tyrannosaurus flings the creature into the air
up to 10 feet up from its mouth and 20 feet away. The
creature falls 25 feet (assuming the tyrannosaurus
flings it as high as it can) and takes falling damage
accordingly. If the flung creature lands on another
creature, the creature it lands on takes the same amount of bludgeoning damage. The
creature being landed on can attempt a DC 23 basic Reflex save.
Pin Prey [reaction] Trigger The tyrannosaurus critically hits a Large or smaller foe with its
foot. Effect The creature struck by the foot is knocked prone and the tyrannosaurus
uses its foot to hold the creature in place. As long as the tyrannosaurus doesn’t
move from its position, the pinned creature is Grabbed. A tyrannosaurus gains
a +2 circumstance bonus to attack a creature it has pinned in this manner, but
it cannot use Swallow Whole on the target unless it uses its jaws to Grab the
victim first.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Medium, 3d6+8 bludgeoning, Rupture 26
Trample [three-actions] Huge or smaller, foot, DC 29
D
103

102
RABIES
While many societies adore dogs
and value them for their loyalty as
pets, no affliction other than rabies
can reverse sentiments about these
creatures quite so easily. While
many animals can be afflicted with
this debilitating illness, something
about a loyal family pet growing
feral and violent as a result of the
disease makes it that much worse.
Rabies (disease); Saving
Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Stage
1 sickened 1 (1 day); Stage 2
sickened 2 (1 day); Stage 3
confusion (1 day); Stage 4 dead
Dog
Dogs are trusted and loyal companions that serve as guardians, protectors, and
hunting companions. Their ability to detect prey or predators via scent and
their predilection to accompany humanoids makes them ideal pets for most
adventurers. There are hundreds of breeds of dogs in the world-from tiny
lapdogs who shower their masters in affection to muscular dogs that stand
nearly 4 feet high at the shoulder-and they can be found in nearly any place
where people reside. Larger breeds might even be used as mounts for smaller
adventurers, and some cultures use dogs as beasts of burden capable of pulling
sleds loaded with supplies across the icy tundra. Regardless, many adventurers
find value in having a dog.
Guard Dog
The typical guard dog is loyal to and beloved by many communities. Often
adored as pets, they also excel as protectors and trackers, and can be fearless
when defending a beloved master or family member. The statistics presented
below work well for any number of breeds of dog ranging from 20 to 50
pounds in weight. Wild dogs can also use these statistics, but their untamed
nature makes them far more unpredictable and threatening. Feral dogs are
perhaps even more dangerous, for unlike their wild cousins, feral dogs often
lack the instinctual fear of humanity that stops wild creatures from interacting
with people.
GUARD DOG CREATURE –1
N SMALL ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +4, Stealth +5, Survival +4
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 15; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 8
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +6, Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Pack Attack The dog’s Strikes deal 1d4 extra damage to creatures within the reach of at
least two of the dog’s allies.
Riding Dog
Riding dogs types include larger dogs, such as mastiffs,
wolfhounds, and huskies, and are bred often by halflings
and gnomes to serve as mounts. Riding dogs are as loyal and
devoted to their masters as guard dogs, and are ferocious
in battle, regardless of whether they bear a rider or not. As
with guard dogs, these large hounds can be wild or feral in
nature, and, in some cases, might rival packs of wolves with
regard to the danger they pose to inhabitants of rural areas.
RIDING DOG CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +7, Survival +5
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +5
HP 20
Buck [reaction] DC 17
Speed 35 feet
Melee jaws +7, Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Pack Attack The dog’s Strikes deal 1d4 extra damage to creatures
within the reach of at least two of the dog’s allies.
D
103

102
INFILTRATING A PARTY
While incorporating a doppelganger
who infiltrates the adventuring
party into your game can lead to
many exciting narrative possibilities,
in practice, it’s not easy (or even
advisable) to pull off. If you wish
to try, it’s best to make sure you
know your players well and have
their trust. You can take a targeted
player aside to let them know
that, for a time, they’ll be playing a
doppelganger, but take care not to
remove the player’s agency from the
game for too long or too often, as
that can get old fast from the other
side of the GM screen!
Doppelganger
In their natural forms, doppelgangers are humanoid creatures with flesh of
indeterminate color and features that lack fine details, as if unfinished. As
masters of mimicry, they use their abilities to impersonate others in devious
ways, often infiltrating settlements and residing within them for years without
being detected.
Doppelgangers are incredibly secretive, with some nearing outright paranoia. They
choose their targets carefully and go to great lengths not to reveal their intentions
before their plans come to fruition. Doppelgangers usually infiltrate communities
in order to gain some manner of wealth or power, and assume the guises of other
(usually influential) persons to allow the creatures they’re impersonating to take the
fall for any negative consequences that may result from their actions.
Though most are not evil, doppelgangers are manipulative and self-serving. As
they don’t have their own society and aren’t monolithic in their motivations, an
individual doppelganger has its own unique interests and impulses, though many
are over-indulgent. Some doppelgangers enjoy the thrill of subtlety, while others
favor grander schemes, such as manipulating a nation’s political
infrastructure. Others seek to exploit merchant guilds to gain
immense wealth, while others use their shape-changing ability to
destroy relationships between close friends or families.
Doppelgangers are careful and patient creatures. They are willing
to slowly construct elaborate schemes that may require extended
periods of time-even decades-to yield results.
Doppelgangers often work alone, as they don’t trust potential cohorts
not to ruin their plans. There are rare times when doppelgangers might
reveal secrets to high-ranking individuals to ensure a successful infiltration.
When they do work with others, it’s because they’ve taken the shape of a
target group’s leader, unbeknownst to the organization’s members.
Doppelgangers can grow in power by learning skills and
abilities, and often make excellent rogues, spellcasters, or
fighters. A doppelganger that has class abilities can often
effectively infiltrate and plague an adventuring group as a
powerful antagonist-but using a doppelganger like this in
your game should be handled with care (see the Infiltrating a Party sidebar
above for more information).
DOPPELGANGER CREATURE 3
UNCOMMON N MEDIUM HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Common, two other languages
Skills Deception +11, Diplomacy +11, Society +8, Stealth +8
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +4
AC 18; Fort +5, Ref +10, Will +11
HP 50
End the Charade [reaction] (attack); Trigger The doppelganger is transformed with Change
Shape and another creature moves adjacent to it or takes a hostile action against it.
Effect The doppelganger reverts to its natural form and can make a Strike against the
triggering creature. If the creature was unaware the doppelganger was in disguise,
that creature is flat-footed against this attack.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile), Damage 2d6+5 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 21; 3rd mind reading (at will)
Change Shape [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation) The doppelganger
takes on the specific appearance of any Small or Medium humanoid who it has seen
and whose appearance it remembers. This doesn’t change the doppelganger’s Speed
or its attack and damage bonuses with its Strikes but might change the damage type
its Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning). 
D
105

104
Dragon, Chromatic
While there are many types of dragons, from the powerful planar dragons to the
strange esoteric dragons, few dragon varieties are as well-known and as rightly
feared as the chromatic dragons. Differentiated by the hue of their scales, each
color of dragon unleashes its own flavor of murderous cruelty-be it by claw,
tooth, or breath-and unlike most creatures, dragons only become more powerful
as they age. Their lust for treasure, food, bloodshed, and control are legendary.
Physically powerful with egos to match, these dragons are often morally depraved
and act as criminal masterminds, vicious tyrants, or voracious raiders.
Shape-Changing Dragons
Some dragons can take humanoid form, allowing them to infiltrate settlements or
influence others without revealing their true nature. They gain the following ability:
Change Shape [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation) The dragon takes on
the appearance of any Small or Medium humanoid. This doesn’t change its Speed or
attack and damage bonuses with its Strikes, but might change the damage type its
Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning).
Chromatic Dragon Spellcasters
Each type of chromatic dragon features a sidebar on spellcasting dragons of that
type. To make a chromatic dragon spellcaster, remove the dragon’s Draconic Frenzy
and Draconic Momentum abilities, and give it the spells outlined in its sidebar. You
can swap out any number of these with other arcane spells, provided you keep the
same number of spells for each level. You might also want to increase the dragon’s
Intelligence or Charisma modifier by 1 or 2 to reflect its mastery of magic.
Chromatic Dragons of Golarion
The chromatic dragons that dwell around the Inner Sea region are cruel and
sinister monsters who inspire as much fear as reverence. These terrible beasts are
no mere myth, however, but a very real threat to the people with whom they share
their lands. Most dwell in the wild places of the world, and only the most brazen
of them regularly meddle in mortal affairs. The dragons of Golarion believe that
they are descended from two original beings, Apsu and Tiamat, and their rich
mythology attempts to explain the origins of the age-old war between chromatic
and metallic dragons.
Black dragons thrive in swampy wildernesses like the Mushfens in Varisia or the
wrecked coastline now known as the Sodden Lands, while blue dragons prefer the
sand-swept deserts of Thuvia and Osirion. Brutish green dragons roam the forests of
the River Kingdoms in abundance and even the elven kingdom of Kyonin, particularly
in the demon-tainted Tanglebriar. One of the most infamous red dragons, Aashaq, a
wyrm priestess of the draconic god Dahak, makes her home among the isles of the
Shackles, where she lords over her followers and leads raids throughout the Inner Sea
region. White dragons, though they may be found in virtually any mountain range
in Avistan, are perhaps most prevalent around the Crown of the World, where they
threaten travelers caravaning across the Path of Aganhei.
Black Dragon
Murderous tyrants of marshes, swamps, bogs, and fens, black dragons terrorize their
domains with intense fervor. Gleefully sadistic, they rule their fetid principalities
from a deep cave or otherwise isolated part of the swamp with a mix of lightningquick raids and subterfuge. Their hatred for other creatures is as acidic as their
breath weapons, and they rarely tolerate even other dragons of their kind-except
perhaps to mate or temporarily collaborate to take down a mutual enemy.
Black dragons are amphibious-although they breathe air, their gills also allow
them to breathe water. Their frills and fins make them accomplished swimmers, well
suited to their wetland environments and submerged lairs. They’re immune to the
fetid water that comes as a result of their magical ability to corrupt water.
BLACK DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Black dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG BLACK DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 25,
attack +18; 3rd slow, stinking cloud;
2nd blur, glitterdust, invisibility; 1st
alarm, ray of enfeeblement, true
strike; Cantrips (3rd) dancing lights,
detect magic, prestidigitation, read
aura, tanglefoot
ADULT BLACK DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 30,
attack +24; As young black dragon,
plus 5th black tentacles, mariner’s
curse; 4th clairvoyance, dimension
door, suggestion; 3rd paralyze;
Cantrips (5th) dancing lights,
detect magic, prestidigitation, read
aura, tanglefoot
ANCIENT BLACK DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 37,
attack +32; As adult black dragon,
plus 7th finger of death, mask of
terror, reverse gravity; 6th dominate,
true seeing, wall of force; 5th prying
eye; Cantrips (7th) dancing lights,
detect magic, prestidigitation, read
aura, tanglefoot
D
105

104
SERZILIAN
The great wyrm black dragon
Serzilian rules over the fetid
Graidmere swamp in Ustalav, where
she has resided for over 800 years.
She knows something darker even
than herself resides somewhere in
the swamp, but she has yet to find
how to summon such an entity. For
now, she slumbers, waking only to
demand sacrifices.
Black dragon lairs are as foul as their souls. The floors are littered with rotting
meat, and plundered treasures line the muck and slime of their dank caves amid
twisted roots and creepers. Such places are often crawling with pests, snakes,
and slimes. Though they claim natural caverns when they can, they make do
with areas of dense, twisted vegetation within a swamp. Black dragon treasure
hoards primarily consist of gems and expensive glass work, as valuables of softer
substance can’t survive the dragon’s acidic presence.
YOUNG BLACK DRAGON CREATURE 7
CE LARGE ACID AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +15; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +14, Arcana +12, Athletics +17, Deception +15, Intimidation +15, Stealth +16
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 25; Fort +17, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 125; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 23
Tail Lash [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the dragon’s tail takes
an action to Strike or attempt a skill check; Effect The dragon
Strikes with its tail at the triggering creature at a –2 penalty.
If it hits, the creature takes a –2 circumstance penalty to the
triggering roll.
Speed 40 feet, fly 100 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +19 (acid, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+9 piercing plus
1d6 acid
Melee [one-action] claw +19 (agile), Damage 2d6+9 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +17 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+7
bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+7
piercing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (acid, arcane, evocation); The
dragon breathes a spray of acid that deals 8d6
acid damage in a 60-foot line (DC 25 basic
Reflex save). It can’t use Breath Weapon
again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The dragon makes two claw
Strikes and one horns Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum The dragon recharges its
Breath Weapon whenever it scores a critical hit
with a Strike.
ADULT BLACK DRAGON CREATURE 11
CE LARGE ACID AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +22; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +18, Arcana +19, Athletics +24,
Deception +20, Intimidation +20, Stealth +20
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +3
AC 31; Fort +23, Ref +18, Will +21; +1 status to all saves
vs. magic
HP 215; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet,
DC 28
Tail Lash [reaction] As young black dragon.
Speed 50 feet, fly 120 feet, swim 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +25 (acid, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+13
piercing plus 2d6 acid
D
107

106
BLUE DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Blue dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG BLUE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 28,
attack +21; 4th dimension door,
hallucinatory terrain; 3rd dream
message, hypnotic pattern, paralyze;
2nd dispel magic, invisibility, mirror
image; 1st alarm, charm, unseen
servant; Cantrips (4th) detect magic,
message, read aura, shield, sigil
ADULT BLUE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 34,
attack +27; As young blue dragon,
plus 6th baleful polymorph, mislead;
5th chromatic wall, false vision,
illusory scene; 4th clairvoyance;
Cantrips (6th) detect magic,
message, read aura, shield, sigil
ANCIENT BLUE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 41,
attack +35; As adult blue dragon,
plus 8th disappearance, maze,
mind blank; 7th paralyze, prismatic
spray, spell turning; 6th feeblemind;
Cantrips (8th) detect magic,
message, read aura, shield, sigil
Melee [one-action] claw +25 (agile, magical), Damage 2d10+13 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +23 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+11 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +23 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+11 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 30; 2nd darkness (at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](acid, arcane, evocation); The dragon breathes a spray of acid that
deals 12d6 acid damage in an 80-foot line (DC 30 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Corrupt Water [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, necromancy); Frequency Once per day; Effect
The dragon permanently befouls 10 cubic feet of liquid within 90 feet. The liquid
becomes undrinkable and unable to support water-breathing life. This destroys liquid
magic or alchemical items if they’re of a lower level than the dragon (a creature can
attempt a DC 28 Will save to protect liquids in its possession). This doesn’t affect the
liquids in a creature’s body.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young black dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young black dragon.
ANCIENT BLACK DRAGON CREATURE 16
UNCOMMON CE HUGE ACID AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Goblin, Jotun, Orcish
Skills Acrobatics +25, Arcana +26, Athletics +32, Deception +29, Intimidation +29,
Stealth +27
Str +8, Dex +5, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +5, Cha +5
AC 39; Fort +30, Ref +27, Will +29; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 325; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 35
Tail Lash [reaction] As young black dragon.
Speed 60 feet, fly 150 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +33 (acid, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+14 piercing plus 2d6 acid
and 2d6 persistent acid
Melee [one-action] claw +33 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+14 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +31 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+12 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +31 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+12 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 37; 2nd darkness (at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](acid, arcane, evocation); The dragon breathes a spray of acid that
deals 17d6 acid damage in a 100-foot line (DC 39 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Corrupt Water [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, necromancy); As adult black dragon, but
DC 35.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young black dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young black dragon.
Blue Dragon
Blue dragons are the sleek and poised cosmopolitans of the chromatic dragons.
Their brand of evil is organized, manipulative, and regal. Blue dragons often
lair near or within cities and set out to bend the population to their will and
gather hordes of servants. These dragons love spinning webs of conspiracy. A blue
dragon’s lackeys typically don’t even realize that they serve a dragon, but instead
think the protection money, tariffs, or taxes they are amassing is treasure for a
cruel but legitimate master. In some ways, blue dragons even see their servants as
a living hoard and value them like treasure. These dragons have been known to
use these tactics even with their own chromatic cousins.
Not all blue dragons work clandestinely. Some lord over desert tribes and
hill people like vengeful gods, demanding both tribute and worship. No matter
how blue dragons manage their underlings, their bearing is regal and their lairs
palatial; they’re universally intolerant of insubordination, incompetence, and
embezzlement, and punish perpetrators with murderous efficiency.
D
107

106
DEYRUBRUJAN
Responsible for destroying three
separate villages in Avistan after
a lengthy raid to seek hidden
information, this great wyrm blue
dragon maintains a fortress lair in
the desert nation of Thuvia. Called
Hidden Nest, Deyrubrujan’s lair
is a factory where Usij cultists
manufacture all manner of
potions, drugs, and poisons, while
ultimately seeking a way to make
a counterfeit Sun Orchid Elixir.
Blue dragons are also known for their use and mastery of illusion magic. They
make use of illusions to augment their manipulations and bewilder their foes in
battle. Blue dragons also have some control over water, but use this ability to
destroy water, something quite dangerous for those who encounter them in their
desert lairs.
The ideal lair for a blue dragon contains multiple passages, rooms, and
secret chambers. As social creatures, blue dragons prefer to host guests in
comfort-but their dwellings should not be so public that just anyone can
come calling. A force of guards keeps out intruders, and clever illusions
conceal the edifice from prying eyes. Rather than a pile of coins or gems, a
blue dragon’s true hoard is the rich furnishings in its citadel-
expensive art, ornate furniture, and architectural marvels.
YOUNG BLUE DRAGON CREATURE 9
LE LARGE DRAGON ELECTRICITY
Perception +18; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +15, Arcana +16, Deception +18, Diplomacy +18,
Intimidation +18, Society +16, Stealth +15, Survival +16
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +3
Sound Imitation The dragon can mimic any sound it has heard. It must
succeed at a Deception check with a +4 circumstance bonus to do so.
AC 28; Fort +19, Ref +18, Will +19
HP 170; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 26
Wing Deflection [reaction] Trigger The dragon is targeted with an attack.
Effect The dragon raises its wing, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus
to AC against the triggering attack. If the dragon is Flying, it descends
10 feet after the attack is complete.
Speed 30 feet, burrow 15 feet, fly 100 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (electricity, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+11 piercing plus
1d12 electricity
Melee [one-action] claw +21 (agile), Damage 2d8+11 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +19 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+9 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +19 (reach 10 feet),
Damage 1d8+9 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 28; 1st create
water (at will; see desert thirst);
Cantrips (4th) ghost sound
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane,
electricity, evocation); The dragon
breathes lightning that deals 5d12
electricity damage in an 80-foot line (DC
28 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Desert Thirst (arcane, transmutation) When casting
create water, the dragon can attempt to destroy
liquid instead of creating it, turning an equal
amount of liquid into sand. This destroys liquid
magic or alchemical items if they’re of a lower level
than the dragon (a creature can attempt a DC 26
Will save to protect all liquids in its possession).
This doesn’t affect the liquids in a creature’s body.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes
and one horns Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum The dragon recharges its Breath Weapon
whenever it scores a critical hit with a Strike.
D
109

108
GREEN DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Green dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG GREEN DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 26,
attack +20; 3rd dispel magic,
locate, mind reading; 2nd humanoid
form, mirror image, see invisibility;
1st illusory object, true strike,
ventriloquism; Cantrips (3rd)
dancing lights, detect magic, ghost
sound, read aura, shield
ADULT GREEN DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 33,
attack +26; As young green
dragon, plus 5th cloudkill, dispel
magic, tongues; 4th clairvoyance,
dimension door, stoneskin; Cantrips
(5th) dancing lights, detect magic,
ghost sound, read aura, shield
ANCIENT GREEN DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC
39, attack +33; As adult green
dragon, plus 8th mind blank,
prismatic wall; 7th contingency,
prismatic spray, spell turning; 6th
feeblemind, teleport, true seeing;
Cantrips (8th) dancing lights, detect
magic, ghost sound, read aura, shield
ADULT BLUE DRAGON CREATURE 13
LE HUGE DRAGON ELECTRICITY
Perception +24; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +22, Arcana +25, Deception +26, Diplomacy +26, Intimidation +24,
Society +23, Stealth +20, Survival +22
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +5
Sound Imitation The dragon can mimic any sound it has heard. It must succeed at a
Deception check with a +4 circumstance bonus to do so.
AC 34; Fort +24, Ref +23, Will +23; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 260; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 32
Wing Deflection [reaction] As young blue dragon.
Speed 40 feet, burrow 20 feet, fly 150 feet
Melee [one-action]jaws +27 (electricity, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d8+12 piercing plus 1d12
electricity
Melee [one-action] claw +27 (magical, agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +25 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d8+10 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +25 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+10 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 33; 6th illusory creature, illusory object, ventriloquism (at will);
1st create water (at will; see desert thirst); Cantrips (6th) ghost sound
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, electricity, evocation); The dragon breathes lightning that
deals 9d12 electricity damage in a 100-foot line (DC 33 basic Reflex save). It can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Desert Thirst (arcane, transmutation); As young blue dragon, but DC 32.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young blue dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young blue dragon.
ANCIENT BLUE DRAGON CREATURE 18
UNCOMMON LE HUGE DRAGON ELECTRICITY
Perception +31; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Jotun, Ignan, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +28, Arcana +33, Deception +35, Diplomacy +35, Intimidation +33,
Society +35, Stealth +28, Survival +29
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +6, Int +7, Wis +5, Cha +7
Sound Imitation The dragon can mimic any sound it has heard. To do so, it must succeed
at a Deception check with a +4 circumstance bonus.
AC 42; Fort +32, Ref +30, Will +33; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 370; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 39
Wing Deflection [reaction] As young blue dragon.
Speed 50 feet, burrow 30 feet, fly 200 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +35 (electricity, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+15 piercing plus
2d12 electricity
Melee [one-action] claw +35 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +33 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage 3d10+13 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horns +33 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+13 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 43; 8th hallucinatory terrain (at will), illusory creature (at will),
illusory object (at will), ventriloquism (at will); 7th project image (see mirage); 1st create
water (at will; see desert thirst); Cantrips (8th) ghost sound
Breath Weapon (arcane, electricity, evocation); The dragon breathes lightning that
deals 12d12 electricity damage in a 120-foot line (DC 40 basic Reflex save). It can’t
use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Each time the dragon uses Breath Weapon, a 20-foot-radius storm cloud appears
80 feet above a point of the dragon’s choosing along the Breath Weapon’s path. Clouds
last for 10 minutes and allow the dragon to use Storm Breath.
Desert Thirst (arcane, transmutation); As young blue dragon, but DC 37. 
D
109

108
ATHERVOX
As green dragons are
contemplative and seek scholarly
endeavors, Athervox is no
different. An astronomer by trade,
this great wyrm green dragon
maintains an observatory near
Senara in the Whisper Woods of
Cheliax. There, she struck a deal
with House Thrune where she
agreed to instruct a handful of
apprentices. After a few years of
instruction, these "apprentices"
vanished one night, taking
volumes of the dragon’s crucial
notes-a slight she has not
forgotten and plans to seek
vengeance for.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young blue dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young blue dragon.
Mirage Whenever the dragon uses Breath Weapon while the illusory image from its
innate project image spell persists, it can cause the Breath Weapon to originate from
itself or the image.
Storm Breath [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, electricity, evocation); Frequency Once per round;
Requirement A storm cloud created by Breath Weapon is within 500 feet, and the
dragon can see the cloud. Effect The dragon calls down a lightning bolt from a storm
cloud created by its Breath Weapon. This creates a vertical line of lightning to the ground
that deals 6d12 electricity damage to all enemies in its path (DC 40 basic Reflex save).
Green Dragon
Green dragons are the most contemplative of the chromatic dragons as well as
the most approachable. The key to understanding green dragons is to understand
their obsession with knowledge and self-discipline. Any careful approach that
takes advantage of a green dragon’s fixations may end in a diplomatic outcome,
but any misstep or slight can provoke a savage attack. Like most chromatic
dragons, green dragons do not suffer fools-and the threshold for what they
consider foolish is very low.
Though more open than their chromatic cousins to dealing with other creatures
and dragons, green dragons prefer an isolated and quiet life. They tend to lair in the
most forbidding parts of a forest, surrounded by tangled thickets, or else at the heart
of some dismal gulch. If the terrain is suitable, some green dragons make their home
in natural caves, which they expand to suit their needs.
Green dragons’ pride leads them to see to the preservation of
their forest homes. They feel that a verdant and lush forest is
something that they alone have cultivated. This leads some
green dragons to follow the path of druidism, though most
prefer to study the arcane arts and occult lore. Most of
them delve deeply into one particular field of study, and
correspond with other scholars in the field by adopting
a pen name that hides their true nature. Regardless
of their chosen focus, green dragons seek to improve
themselves, and their desire for knowledge makes
them more likely to deal diplomatically with other
creatures in order to obtain new information.
Their hoards are typically well kept,
organized, and filled with tomes of lore and
scrolls of magic along with antiquities they
collect for their own inscrutable reasons.
Many of these treasures come from across
the globe, and many an adventurer has
survived an encounter with a green dragon
by stroking its ego and plying it with rare
artifacts or lost lore from ancient cultures.
YOUNG GREEN DRAGON CREATURE 8
LE LARGE AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +16; darkvision, scent (imprecise)
60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +13, Arcana +16, Athletics +17,
Deception +14, Diplomacy +16, Intimidation
+16, Nature +14, Occultism +17, Society +14,
Stealth +15
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +2,
Cha +4
D
111

110
DRAGONS ON OTHER
WORLDS
On the planet Triaxus the
Wanderer, the seventh world from
Golarion’s sun, dragons rule entire
continents. There, ancient dragons
maintain city-states and nations.
In a vast region known as the
Drakelands, chromatic dragons
have subjugated the humanoid
inhabitants and frequently war
among themselves. However, a few
good dragons maintain holdings
there. In the region knowns as
the Skyfire Mandate, a different
dynamic exists: good dragons who
chose to work in harmony with the
humanoid inhabitants have created
a buffer against the tyrants of
the Drakelands. There, creatures
known as dragonkin work
alongside humanoids to patrol
the border, making up a group
known as the Dragon Legion.
AC 28; Fort +16, Ref +16, Will +17
HP 135; Immunities paralyzed, poison, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 24
Twisting Tail [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the dragon’s tail uses a move action or
leaves a square during a move action it’s using. Effect The dragon makes a tail Strike
at the creature with a –2 penalty. If it hits, the dragon disrupts the creature’s action.
Speed 30 feet, fly 120 feet, swim 30 feet; woodland stride
Melee [one-action] jaws +20 (poison, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+8 piercing plus 2d4 poison
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d8+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+7 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horn +18 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12+7 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 26; 2nd entangle; 1st charm (×2)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, poison); The dragon breathes a toxic cloud that
deals 9d6 poison damage in a 40-foot cone (DC 25 basic Fortitude save). It can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes and one horn Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum The dragon recharges its Breath Weapon whenever it scores a
critical hit with a Strike.
Woodland Stride The green dragon ignores difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain
from non-magical foliage.
ADULT GREEN DRAGON CREATURE 12
LE HUGE AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +22; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +19, Arcana +22, Athletics +24, Deception +19, Diplomacy +23,
Intimidation +23, Nature +20, Occultism +24, Society +22, Stealth +21
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +5
AC 34; Fort +20, Ref +22, Will +23; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215; Immunities paralyzed, poison, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 31
Twisting Tail [reaction] As young green dragon.
Speed 40 feet, fly 160 feet, swim 40 feet; trackless step, woodland stride
Melee [one-action]jaws +26 (magical, poison, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+12 piercing plus 3d4 poison
Melee [one-action] claw +26 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +24 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d8+10 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horn +24 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+10 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 32; 4th suggestion; 2nd entangle (×2); At Will charm
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, poison) The dragon breathes a toxic cloud that
deals 13d6 poison damage in a 50-foot cone (DC 31 basic Fortitude save). It can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young green dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young green dragon.
Trackless Step The green dragon always gains the benefits of Cover Tracks in natural
surroundings, even while moving at full speed.
Woodland Stride As young green dragon.
ANCIENT GREEN DRAGON CREATURE 17
UNCOMMON LE GARGANTUAN AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic, Elven, Jotun, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +25, Arcana +32, Athletics +30, Deception +27, Diplomacy +31,
Intimidation +31, Nature +28, Occultism +34, Society +31, Stealth +29 (camouflage)
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +6, Wis +5, Cha +6
Camouflage The dragon can Hide in natural environments even if it doesn’t have cover.
AC 41; Fort +30, Ref +29, Will +32; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 315; Immunities paralyzed, poison, sleep
D
111

110
DARALATHXYL
Known as the Sixth King of the Five
Kings Mountains, this red dragon
has lived in Droskar’s Crag for over
two millennia. Thankfully, this
powerful dragon slumbers for long
periods, but like a restless volcano,
he is due for a rampage.
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 37
Miasma (aura, poison); 20 feet. After the dragon uses its Breath Weapon, a cloud of
poison gas continues to emanate from its body for 1 round. Any creature that ends
its turn in the miasma takes 4d6 poison damage (DC 37 basic Fortitude save). Any
creature in the miasma is concealed and treats other creatures as concealed. The
dragon can see through this concealment.
Twisting Tail [reaction] As young green dragon.
Speed 50 feet, fly 200 feet, swim 50 feet; trackless step, woodland stride
Melee [one-action]jaws +33 (magical, poison, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d12+15 piercing plus 4d4 poison
Melee [one-action] claw +33 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +31 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage 3d10+13 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] horn +31 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+13 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 39; 6th dominate; 4th charm (at will), suggestion; 2nd
entangle (at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, poison); The dragon breathes a toxic
cloud that deals 18d6 poison damage in a 60-foot cone (DC 37 basic
Fortitude save). The Breath Weapon also creates a miasma. The dragon
can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young green dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young green dragon.
Trackless Step As adult green dragon.
Woodland Stride As young green dragon.
Red Dragon
The largest and most powerful of the chromatic dragons,
red dragons are a menace to civilizations everywhere, and
their strength is rivaled only by their arrogance. Red dragons
see themselves as regents and overlords of all dragonkind.
With their crowns of crimson spikes and their command of
blistering flame, this is no haughty boast in their eyes-only
unquestioned fact.
Red dragons don’t deign to speak with lesser creatures; they
simply dominate and burn, enslaving weaker creatures to act as
servants and to look after their lairs while the dragons slumber
away. They take pleasure in dominating these creatures, and
they demand tribute from their supplicants. Those who anger or
disappoint end up eaten or reduced to ash. They command their
enslaved minions to constantly build onto their lairs, carving
out new tunnels and designing cunning traps that ensure the
dragon’s security.
Driven by their arrogance, red dragons are the most
likely of the chromatic dragons to ravage settlements.
They want the world to see them in their rightful
place as powerful tyrants, and they delight in
threatening all other creatures. They have no
qualms about bullying, manipulating, or killing
to complete their goals-or simply intimidating
others through a public display of brutality
and dominance.
As legendary as the brutishness of red dragons is the magnificence
of their hoards of gold. Their lairs are often situated in dangerous
places, with volcanoes being a favorite spot, as they find them
foreboding and the constant warmth is comfortable. No
matter the locale, red dragons sleep on a litter of coins and
other treasures, which they zealously guard. Sometimes,
the dragon’s internal heat causes these precious metals
to fuse together.
D
113

112
RED DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Red dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG RED DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 29,
attack +23; 4th crushing despair,
invisibility, stoneskin; 3rd
grease, haste, mind reading; 2nd
comprehend language, resist
energy, see invisibility; 1st charm,
ray of enfeeblement, true strike;
Cantrips (4th) chill touch, daze,
mage hand, message, sigil
ADULT RED DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 35,
attack +29; As young red dragon,
plus 6th dispel magic, teleport,
wall of force; 5th cloak of colors,
command, tongues; Cantrips (6th)
chill touch, daze, mage hand,
message, sigil
ANCIENT RED DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 42,
attack +36; As adult red dragon,
plus 9th fiery body, prismatic
sphere; 8rd discern location, mind
blank, prismatic wall; 7th prismatic
spray, resist energy, reverse
gravity; Cantrips (9th) chill touch,
daze, mage hand, message, sigil
YOUNG RED DRAGON CREATURE 10
CE LARGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +20; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, smoke vision
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +15, Arcana +17, Athletics +22, Deception +19, Diplomacy +19,
Intimidation +21, Stealth +17
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +3
Smoke Vision Smoke doesn’t impair a red dragon’s vision; it ignores the concealed
condition from smoke.
AC 30; Fort +21, Ref +18, Will +19
HP 210; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 10
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 27
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Speed 40 feet, fly 120 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +23 (fire, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+12 piercing plus 2d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile), Damage 2d10+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +21 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing +21 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+10 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 27; Cantrips (4th) detect magic, read aura
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, fire) The dragon breathes a blast of flame that
deals 11d6 fire damage in a 40-foot cone (DC 30 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes and one wing Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum The dragon recharges its Breath Weapon whenever it scores a
critical hit with a Strike.
ADULT RED DRAGON CREATURE 14
CE HUGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +26; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, smoke vision
Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Orcish
Skills Acrobatics +23, Arcana +25, Athletics +29, Deception +25, Diplomacy +25,
Intimidation +27, Stealth +23
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +6, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +5
Smoke Vision As young red dragon.
AC 37; Fort +28, Ref +25, Will +26; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 305; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 15
Dragon Heat (arcane, aura, evocation, fire); 5 feet, 3d6 fire damage (DC 30 basic Reflex)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 33
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Speed 50 feet, fly 150 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +29 (fire, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d12+15 piercing plus 2d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +29 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +27 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d12+13 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing +27 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+13 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 35; 4th suggestion; Cantrips (6th) detect magic, read aura
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, fire); The dragon breathes a blast of flame that
deals 15d6 fire damage in a 50-foot cone (DC 36 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young red dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young red dragon.
ANCIENT RED DRAGON CREATURE 19
UNCOMMON CE HUGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +35; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, smoke vision
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Jotun, Orcish
Skills Acrobatics +30, Arcana +35, Athletics +37, Deception +35, Diplomacy +35,
Intimidation +37, Stealth +33
D
113

112
DAHAK
Dahak, the Endless Destruction, is
an ancient dragon god spawned by
the righteous Apsu. Dahak is the
god of destruction, evil dragons,
and greed. After his birth, Dahak
made his way to Hell where he
roamed for ages before returning
to the Material Plane to fight
against his father and siblings,
reveling in destruction and
pledging to destroy the world.
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +8, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +7
Smoke Vision As young red dragon.
AC 45; Fort +35, Ref +32, Will +35; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 425; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 20
Dragon Heat (arcane, aura, evocation, fire); 10 feet, 4d6 fire damage (DC 39 basic Reflex)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 40
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Redirect Fire [reaction] (abjuration, arcane); Trigger A creature within 100 feet casts a fire spell,
or a fire spell otherwise comes into effect from a source within 100 feet. Effect The
dragon makes all the choices to determine the targets, destination, or other effects of
the spell, as though it were the caster.
Speed 60 feet, fly 180 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +37 (fire, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d10+17 piercing plus 3d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +37 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d8+17 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +35 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage 4d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing +35 (agile, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d8+15 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 42; 8th, wall of fire (at will); 4th suggestion (at will);
Cantrips (9th) detect magic, read aura
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, fire) The dragon breathes a blast of flame that
deals 20d6 fire damage in a 60-foot cone (DC 42 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young red dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young red dragon.
Manipulate Flames [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, transmutation); The red dragon attempts
to take control of a magical fire or a fire spell within 100 feet. If it succeeds at a
counteract check (counteract level 10, counteract modifier +32), the original caster
loses control of the spell or magic fire, control is transferred to the dragon, and the
dragon counts as having Sustained the Spell with this action (if applicable). The dragon
can choose to end the spell instead of taking control, if it chooses.
White Dragon
The most feral and least intelligent of all the chromatic dragons, white dragons
are brutish, predatory, and chiefly motivated by self-preservation. Nearly all
other dragons look down on white dragons as hopelessly hotheaded and dull,
though this does not make them any less dangerous-in fact, it may mean
the opposite. It’s nearly impossible to treat with white dragons, not because
they lack the capacity to do so, but because they just don’t care to. They are
as difficult to deal with as they are quick to anger, and they become incensed
at almost anything. When a white dragon does speak, it spews threats, inane
jokes, and incoherent babbling as a prelude to attacking-and when the attack
comes, it’s bloody and relentless.
Thankfully, white dragons prefer very cold, remote locations that are far from
people. Dwelling on glacial mountaintops or in ice caverns beneath forbidding
tundra, they treat the lands around them as their own personal hunting grounds.
They fly out to feed or terrorize other creatures, especially those who trespass
near the dragon’s territory, then bring any treasure back to be displayed in icy
niches in their lairs. They collect all kinds of valuables, with a slight preference
for items with high utility-such as tools, trade goods, and fine food-over coins
or jewels. The ability to shape ice lets white dragons rearrange their lairs exactly
to their specifications, and they take great pride in how they’ve decorated their
homes over the years.
YOUNG WHITE DRAGON CREATURE 6
CE LARGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +13; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, snow vision
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +10, Arcana +7, Athletics +16, Intimidation +12, Stealth +14
D
115

114
WHITE DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
White dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG WHITE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 24,
attack +16; 2nd dispel magic,
invisibility, resist energy; 1st ray
of enfeeblement, true strike (×2);
Cantrips (2nd) detect magic, ghost
sound, mage hand, ray of frost,
read aura
ADULT WHITE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 29,
attack +21; As young white dragon,
plus 4th charm, dimension door,
freedom of movement; 3rd earthbind,
haste, vampiric touch; Cantrips (4th)
detect magic, ghost sound, mage
hand, ray of frost, read aura
ANCIENT WHITE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 36,
attack +28; As adult white dragon,
plus 7th paralyze, resist energy;
6th baleful polymorph, dominate,
true seeing; 5th chromatic wall,
passwall, tongues; Cantrips (7th)
detect magic, ghost sound, mage
hand, ray of frost, read aura
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Snow Vision Snow doesn’t impair a white dragon’s vision; it ignores concealment
from snowfall.
AC 23; Fort +16, Ref +14, Will +11
HP 115; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 5
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 20
Freezing Blood [reaction] (arcane, cold); Trigger An adjacent creature deals piercing or
slashing damage to the dragon. Effect The dragon’s blood sprays on the creature,
dealing 1d6 cold damage. A creature that takes cold damage in this way is slowed
1 for 1 round.
Speed 30 feet, fly 80 feet; ice climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +17 (cold, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+9 piercing plus 1d6 cold
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage 2d6+9 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +15 (reach 15 feet), Damage 1d8+8 bludgeoning
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, cold, evocation) The dragon breathes a cloud of frost that
deals 7d6 cold damage in a 30-foot cone (DC 24 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes and one tail Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum When the dragon scores a critical hit with a Strike, it recharges its
Breath Weapon.
Ice Climb A white dragon can climb on ice as though it had the listed climb Speed. It
ignores difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain from ice and snow and doesn’t risk
falling when crossing ice.
Ground Slam [one-action] The dragon slams into the ground. It can do this if it’s on the ground or
Flying within 10 feet of the ground. Each creature on the ground within 10 feet must
succeed at a DC 24 Reflex save or fall prone and take 2d6 bludgeoning damage. The
dragon can then Step.
Shape Ice [two-actions] (arcane, transmutation, water) The dragon reshapes a cube of ice or snow
it touches, up to 10 feet across. Any creature standing atop the ice must succeed at a
DC 15 Reflex save or Acrobatics check. On a failure, the creature falls prone atop the
ice; on a critical failure, it falls off the ice entirely and is also prone.
ADULT WHITE DRAGON CREATURE 10
CE LARGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +20; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, snow vision
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +16, Arcana +15, Athletics +23, Intimidation +19, Stealth +18
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +5, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Snow Vision As young white dragon.
AC 29; Fort +22, Ref +19, Will +17; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 10
Dragon Chill (arcane, aura, cold, evocation); 5 feet, 2d6 cold damage (DC 27 basic Reflex)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 27
Freezing Blood [reaction] (arcane, cold); As young white dragon, but 2d6 cold damage.
Speed 30 feet, fly 120 feet; ice climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +23 (cold, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+13 piercing plus 2d6 cold
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile, magical), Damage 2d8+13 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +22 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d6+11 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 27; 2nd obscuring mist (at will); 1st gust of wind (at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, cold, evocation); The dragon breathes a cloud of frost that
deals 11d6 cold damage in a 40-foot cone (DC 29 basic Reflex save). It can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young white dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young white dragon.
Ground Slam [one-action] As young white dragon, but DC 29 and 3d6 bludgeoning damage.
Ice Climb As young white dragon.
Shape Ice[two-actions] (arcane, transmutation, water) As young white dragon.
D
115

114
LOGRIVICH
When Queen Elvanna still ruled
Irrisen, she appointed the young
white dragon, Logrivich, to the
Winter Guard, the force that
maintains order in the nation’s
capital of Whitethrone. He resided
in a clock tower, though he hasn’t
been seen in a few years, leading
some to think that he either moved
away or was killed by adventurers
during the city’s recent troubles.
ANCIENT WHITE DRAGON CREATURE 15
UNCOMMON CE HUGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, snow vision
Languages Common, Draconic, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +24, Arcana +23, Athletics +31, Intimidation +28, Stealth +26
Str +8, Dex +3, Con +7, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +3
Snow Vision As young white dragon.
AC 36; Fort +30, Ref +26, Will +24, +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 330; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 15
Blizzard (arcane, aura, cold); 50 feet. After the dragon uses its Breath Weapon, a fierce
blizzard of blinding snow surrounds its body for 1 round. Everything in the aura is
difficult terrain for other creatures that are on the ground, climbing, or flying. The
blowing snow also makes all creatures
in the area concealed. While the blizzard
rages, the dragon’s dragon chill extends to
the full area of the blizzard.
Dragon Chill (arcane, aura, cold,
evocation); 10 feet, 3d6 cold damage
(DC 34 basic Reflex)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear,
mental) 90 feet, DC 34
Freezing Blood [reaction] (arcane, cold); As young
white dragon, but 3d6 cold damage.
Speed 40 feet, fly 160 feet; ice climb 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +31 (cold, magical, reach
15 feet), Damage 3d12+16 piercing plus
3d6 cold
Melee [one-action]claw +31 (agile, magical, reach 10
feet), Damage 3d10+16 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +29 (magical,
reach 20 feet), Damage
2d10+14 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells
DC 36; 6th wall of ice
(at will); 2nd obscuring mist
(at will); 1st gust of wind
(at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane,
cold, evocation) The
dragon breathes a cloud of
frost that deals 16d6 cold
damage in a 50-foot cone
(DC 36 basic Reflex save).
It can’t use Breath Weapon
again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young
white dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young
white dragon.
Ground Slam [one-action] As young white
dragon, but DC 37 and 5d6
bludgeoning damage.
Ice Climb As young white
dragon.
Shape Ice [two-actions] (arcane,
transmutation, water) As
young white dragon.
D
117

116
Dragon, Metallic
Paragons of virtue, nobility, and grace, metallic dragons are benevolent entities
revered as mythic beings akin to gods in both their power and majesty. Few have
ever seen a metallic dragon firsthand, but tales of their intervention in mortals’
lives-and of their passing-always spread far and wide. Named for the way
their scales resemble the shining metals humanoids use in commerce, warfare,
and industry, these immense beings are diverse in their interests and abilities, and
they don’t seem to mind being associated with such mundane materials. After all,
to compare a gold dragon to a gold coin is like comparing an ocean to a glass of
water-though they may seem similar at first glance, the raw power, breadth, and
grandeur of one simply overwhelms the other.
In addition to metallic dragons and their chromatic counterparts
(page 104–115), other types of dragons roam the world and the rest of the
multiverse. In the legendary lands of Tian Xia on the other side of the globe
are the imperial dragons, serpentine beings who protect the cosmic balance and
defend their ancient homeland. Outside the Material Plane, primal dragons such
as the domineering brine dragon and reclusive cloud dragon shape the nature
and goings-on of the Elemental Planes. Countless other types of dragons are sure
to exist, including dragons on far-flung planes of existence and, it is rumored,
primeval dragons who soar between the stars.
Shape-Changing Dragons
Some dragons can take humanoid form, allowing them to infiltrate settlements or
influence others without revealing their true nature. They gain the following ability:
Change Shape [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation); The dragon takes on
the appearance of any Small or Medium humanoid. This doesn’t change its Speed or
attack and damage modifiers with its Strikes, but might change the damage type its
Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning).
Metallic Dragon Spellcasters
Each type of metallic dragon features a sidebar on spellcasting dragons of that
kind. To make a metallic dragon spellcaster, remove the dragon’s Draconic
Frenzy and Draconic Momentum abilities, and give it the spells outlined in
its sidebar. You can swap out any number of these with other arcane spells,
provided you keep the same number of spells for each level. You might also
want to increase the dragon’s Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma modifier by 1
or 2 to reflect its mastery of magic.
Metallic Dragons on Golarion
Metallic dragons are found throughout the Inner Sea region, especially in pockets
of wilderness where they can carve a hideout and then take action on political
and social issues, both in their local area and on a wider scale. Their everlasting
war with chromatic dragons keeps them in close proximity to their evil brethren;
in regions where metallic and chromatic dragons’ territories intersect, humanoid
settlements get caught in the crossfire, and villagers and city-dwellers alike
rightfully fear for their own safety.
Silver dragons lair in abundance around the cold wastes west of Mendev, as a
consequence of the days when they joined thousands of crusaders who marched
headlong into the demon-infested Worldwound. Bronze dragons are abundant
in Taldor, and many copper dragons lair in the wilds of Andoran, where they
wage war alongside other freedom fighters to overthrow devils in the neighboring
empire of Cheliax. Perhaps the most extreme example of a metallic dragon taking
part in human affairs is on the island nation of Hermea, where Mengkare-an
ancient gold wyrm-has begun a grand social experiment he calls “the Glorious
Endeavor.” Ostensibly intended to create a future utopia on Golarion, this highly
controversial experiment is instead regarded by many as a cruel and unusual form
of eugenics.
BRASS DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Brass dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG BRASS DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 25,
attack +18; 3rd earthbind, paralyze;
2nd humanoid form, mirror image,
resist energy; 1st alarm, sleep,
ventriloquism; Cantrips (3rd)
dancing lights, detect magic, mage
hand, prestidigitation, read aura
ADULT BRASS DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 30,
attack +24; As young brass
dragon, plus 5th hallucination,
tongues; 4th confusion,
dimensional anchor, dimension
door; 3rd locate; Cantrips (5th)
dancing lights, detect magic, mage
hand, prestidigitation, read aura
ANCIENT BRASS DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 37,
attack +32; As adult brass dragon,
plus 7th power word blind, project
image, reverse gravity; 6th
dominate, teleport, true seeing; 5th
mind probe; Cantrips (7th) dancing
lights, detect magic, mage hand,
prestidigitation, read aura
D
117
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
116
Brass Dragon
Brass dragons are whimsical tricksters who delight in humor and play. They
particularly enjoy conversations with humans and other civilized humanoids,
delighting in the naive customs of these diminutive races without showing them
haughtiness or scorn. While they may seem merely curious, brass dragons engage
in this sort of conversation with the goal of keeping up to date on regional politics
so they can anticipate future conflicts. Along the way, they create extensive
information networks that begin with their own allies but stretch across all
levels of humanoid society-networks which the brass dragon then uses to subtly
assist settlements near their lair. Unlike the schemes and manipulations of blue
dragons, brass dragons use their informant networks to establish justice
and equality.
These carefree dragons value independence and feel that all
creatures deserve to live as they please, provided they don’t harm
others. They are emotional creatures and tend to have short
attention spans, sometimes falling victim to depression in their
twilight years. To combat this, some brass dragons keep pets
and houseplants that they can care for.
Though they may seem childlike in their curiosity
concerning mortal affairs, a brass dragon’s prowess in
battle is no laughing matter. A brass dragon whose
territory or allies are threatened is a terrifying foe
indeed, quick to shed their innocent guise and
unleash their terrifying might upon evildoers.
Most brass dragons live in desert climates, and
while they keep their lairs hidden, they often
build near humanoid settlements.
YOUNG BRASS DRAGON CREATURE 7
CG LARGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +15; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet,
tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Gnome, Halfling,
Sylvan; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +18, Deception
+15, Diplomacy +15, Society +14
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +2
AC 25; Fort +16, Ref +15, Will +14
HP 125; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear,
mental) 90 feet, DC 23
Wing Deflection
[reaction] Trigger The dragon is
targeted with an attack. Effect The dragon
raises its wing, gaining a +2 circumstance
bonus to AC against the triggering attack. If
the dragon is flying, it descends 10 feet after
the attack is complete.
Speed 40 feet, burrow 30 feet, fly 120 feet
Melee
[one-action] jaws +19 (fire, reach 10 feet), Damage
2d6+8 piercing plus 1d8 fire
Melee
[one-action] claw +19 (agile), Damage 2d6+8 slashing
Melee
[one-action] wing +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage
1d8+7 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 25; Constant (2nd)
speak with animals
Breath Weapon
[two-actions] (arcane, evocation, fire);
The brass dragon breathes fire in a 60-foot 
D
119

118
line that deals 8d6 fire damage (DC 26 basic Reflex save). The dragon can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes and one jaws Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum When the dragon scores a critical hit with a Strike, it recharges
Breath Weapon.
ADULT BRASS DRAGON CREATURE 11
CG LARGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +21; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Gnome, Halfling, Sylvan; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +20, Athletics +23, Deception +20, Diplomacy +20, Society +19
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +3
AC 31, Fort +22, Ref +20, Will +21; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 28
Wing Deflection [reaction] As young brass dragon.
Speed 50 feet, burrow 30 feet, fly 120 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +24 (fire, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+12 piercing plus 2d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +24 (agile, magical), Damage 2d10+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing +22 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12+10 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 30; Constant (2nd) speak with animals
Breath Weapon [two-actions](arcane, evocation, fire); The brass dragon breathes fire in an 80-foot
line that deals 12d6 fire damage (DC 32 basic Reflex save). The dragon can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Desert Wind [two-actions] (air, arcane, concentrate, evocation) Frequency three times per day.
Effect The dragon calls upon the desert wind. This has the same effect as gust of wind
(DC 30 Fortitude) but in a 60-foot cone. A creature that fails its save is also blinded
until the end of its next turn (or for 1 minute on a critical failure).
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young brass dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young brass dragon.
ANCIENT BRASS DRAGON CREATURE 16
UNCOMMON CG HUGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Gnome, Halfling, Sphinx, Sylvan; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +27, Athletics +31, Deception +27, Diplomacy +29, Society +28
Str +7, Dex +5, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +5
AC 39; Fort +30, Ref +29, Will +30; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 325; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 35
Wing Deflection [reaction] As young brass dragon.
Speed 50 feet, burrow 40 feet, fly 150 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +32 (fire, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+15 piercing plus 3d6 fire
and 2d6 persistent fire
Melee [one-action] claw +32 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] wing + 30 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+13 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 37; Constant (2nd) speak with animals
Breath Weapon [two-actions]The brass dragon breathes in one of two ways. The dragon can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Flame (arcane, evocation, fire) The dragon breathes fire in a 100-foot line that
deals 16d6 fire damage (DC 39 basic Reflex save).
• Sleep Gas (arcane, enchantment, incapacitation, sleep); The dragon breathes an
80-foot cone of sleep gas. Each creature within the cone must succeed at a DC 39
Fortitude save or fall unconscious for 1d6 rounds, or 1 minute on a critical failure.
Desert Wind[two-actions] (air, arcane, concentrate, evocation) As adult brass dragon, but DC 37.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young brass dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young brass dragon.
OTHER DRACONIC
CREATURES
The creatures that appear in
this section are considered true
dragons, but a multitude of other
draconic creatures populate
Golarion and beyond. Among
these are the powerful and deadly
linnorms (pages 224–227), a
wide range of drakes (pages
130–135), whimsical faerie dragons
(page 157) and pseudodragons, the
cruel and deceitful azis, and the
sinister undead raveners.
D
119

118
Bronze Dragon
Bronze dragons are among the most common of metallic dragons and the most
likely to ally with mortals on worthy quests. However, they are naturally scholarly
creatures who would rather remain in their lairs studying esoteric lore than go off
on a wild adventure. These aloof and stoic dragons also act as preservationists,
guarding storehouses of ancient lore from destruction or perversion. Bronze
dragons are principled and protective, but while their silver cousins are quick to
crusade for justice, bronze dragons prefer to find an important location worthy of
their protection and guard it against any attack or unwelcome intrusion.
Bronze dragons’ mastery over water and affinity for electricity means they are
a boon to sailors caught in thunderstorms. A bronze dragon’s enemies quickly
discover neither cloudy sky nor turbulent sea provides shelter from their wrath.
Bronze dragons lair along shorelines, often in partially submerged sea caves.
While all dragons keep hoards of treasure, the hoard of a bronze dragon more
resembles a vast library-with the shelves kept carefully above the waterline,
of course. In addition to their collections of esoteric lore, bronze dragons
keep treasures associated with the sea, such as beautiful scrimshaw, flawless
pearls, and equipment inlaid with mother-of-pearl and abalone shell.
YOUNG BRONZE DRAGON CREATURE 9
LG LARGE AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON WATER
Perception +18; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aquan, Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +16, Arcana +20, Athletics +18, Diplomacy +18,
Intimidation +18, Occultism +18, Society +16, Stealth +16
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +3
AC 28; Fort +19, Ref +17, Will +19; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 170; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 26
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Speed 30 feet, fly 120 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (electricity, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d8+11 piercing plus 1d12 electricity
Melee [one-action]claw +21 (agile), Damage 2d8+11 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +19 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+9
bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 28; Constant (2nd) speak
with animals
Breath Weapon [two-actions]The bronze dragon breathes in
one of two ways. The dragon can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Lightning (arcane, electricity, evocation); The
dragon breathes lightning in a 60-foot line
that deals 6d12 electricity damage (DC 28
basic Reflex save).
• Repulsion Gas (abjuration, arcane,
incapacitation, mental); The dragon breathes
a 60-foot line of repulsive gas. Each creature
in the area must succeed at a DC 28 Will
save or become fleeing from the dragon for
1 round (or 2 rounds on a critical failure).
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw
Strikes and one tail Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum When the dragon scores
a critical hit with a Strike, it recharges its
Breath Weapon.
Water Mastery (arcane, transmutation, water)
TIRUVINN
Reclusive and secretive,
this adult bronze dragon
sometimes speaks to
adventurers. That’s how he
came to meet Ameiko Kaijitsu,
who named Sandpoint’s Rusty
Dragon tavern after him.
D
121

120
For up to 30 minutes per day, the dragon, along with allied creatures and vessels
within 50 feet, can move at double their normal Speed in water.
ADULT BRONZE DRAGON CREATURE 13
LG HUGE AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON WATER
Perception +23; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aquan, Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +22, Arcana +28, Athletics +24, Diplomacy +23, Intimidation +23,
Occultism +24, Stealth +22
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +5, Wis +4, Cha +4
AC 34; Fort +24, Ref +23, Will +26; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 260; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Electricity Aura (aura, electricity) 10 feet, 1d12 electricity damage. The bronze dragon
can turn this aura on or off using a single action, which has the concentrate trait,
and it can choose to not affect allies with the aura.
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 31
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Speed 40 feet, fly 140 feet, swim 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +28 (electricity, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+15 piercing plus
1d12 electricity
Melee [one-action] claw +28 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +26 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 1d10+13 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 33; 2nd obscuring mist (at will); Constant (2nd) speak with animals
Breath Weapon [two-actions]As young bronze dragon, but an 80-foot line, DC 33, and the dragon’s
lightning deals 8d12 electricity damage.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young bronze dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young bronze dragon.
Water Mastery As young bronze dragon, but for up to 60 minutes per day.
ANCIENT BRONZE DRAGON CREATURE 18
UNCOMMON LG GARGANTUAN AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON WATER
Perception +32; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 100 feet
Languages Aquan, Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +28, Arcana +35, Athletics +34, Diplomacy +32, Intimidation +32,
Occultism +33, Society +33, Stealth +28
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +6, Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +6
AC 43; Fort +32, Ref +30, Will +34; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 360; Immunities electricity, paralyzed, sleep
Electricity Aura (aura, electricity) 15 feet. As adult bronze dragon, but 2d12 electricity.
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 38
Vortex (aura, water); 40 feet. Water in the aura that is also in the same body of water as
the dragon is difficult terrain for Swimming creatures that don’t have the water trait.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Vortex Pull [reaction] (water); Trigger A creature in the dragon’s vortex uses a Swim action.
Effect The dragon creates a current of water, forcing the triggering creature to attempt
a DC 40 Athletics check to Swim. If the creature fails, it’s pulled 30 feet toward the
dragon and the triggering action is lost. If it succeeds, it can Swim normally (using the
result of that roll if it doesn’t have a Swim speed).
Speed 60 feet, fly 200 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action]jaws +35 (electricity, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d12+16 piercing plus 2d12
electricity
Melee [one-action] claw +35 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+16 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +33 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+14 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 40; 5th control water (at will); 2nd obscuring mist (at will);
Constant (2nd) speak with animals
Breath Weapon [two-actions]As young bronze dragon, but a 100-foot line, DC 40, and the dragon’s
lightning deals 12d12 electricity damage.
BRONZE DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Bronze dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG BRONZE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 28,
attack +21; 4th dimension door, solid
fog; 3rd dispel magic, mind reading,
slow; 2nd comprehend language,
mirror image, resist energy; 1st
alarm, hydraulic push, true strike;
Cantrips (4th) detect magic, light,
message, read aura, shield
ADULT BRONZE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 33,
attack +27; As young bronze
dragon, plus 6th mislead, true
seeing; 5th control water, illusory
scene, tongues; 4th suggestion;
Cantrips (6th) detect magic, light,
message, read aura, shield
ANCIENT BRONZE DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 40,
attack +35; As adult bronze dragon,
plus 8th disappearance, mind blank,
polar ray; 7th prismatic spray, spell
turning, suggestion; 6th teleport;
Cantrips (8th) detect magic, light,
message, read aura, shield
D
121

120
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young bronze dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young bronze dragon.
Water Mastery As young bronze dragon, but up to 120 minutes per day.
Copper Dragon
Capricious and always eager to share a good laugh, copper dragons are among the
wiliest of the metallic dragons, but this by no means interferes with their mission to
spread freedom in oppressive lands. Copper dragons are hedonists who are quick to
indulge in simple pleasures, but they’re also sympathetic to other creatures, slow to
pass judgment, and careful to always examine a situation from as many perspectives
as possible. This philosophy has its drawbacks, however, as copper dragons are
susceptible to negative influences and prone to forgiving the less serious evil acts
performed by their chromatic cousins and other cruel creatures. Copper dragons also
have a difficult time keeping their temper in check once they are roused to anger.
Copper dragons tend to lair in warm or temperate hills, but due to
their nature, they move their lairs every few years. They sometimes
live among other people, especially any dwarves who reside nearby.
Some copper dragons even worship gods typically worshipped
only by humanoids. Among these dragons, worship of
Cayden Cailean is most popular, as they see his love of
freedom and penchant for alcohol aligning with the typical
copper dragon mindset.
A copper dragon’s combat tactics are
as unorthodox as its sense of humor,
as it is more likely to use mockery and
tricks than outright strength to win
its battles. As a copper dragon ages, it
perfects jokes capable of rendering its
foes helpless with laughter.
YOUNG COPPER DRAGON CREATURE 8
CG LARGE DRAGON EARTH
Perception +16; darkvision, scent
(imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Gnomish
Skills Acrobatics +17, Athletics +17,
Crafting +14, Deception +15, Performance
+16, Society +16, Stealth +17
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 27; Fort +16, Ref +17, Will +16; +1 status to
all saves vs. magic
HP 150; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear,
mental) 90 feet, DC 23
Twisting Tail [reaction] Trigger A creature within
reach of the copper dragon’s tail uses a move
action or leaves a square during a move action
it’s using. Effect The dragon makes a tail Strike
at the creature with a –2 penalty. If it hits, the
dragon disrupts the triggering action.
Speed 30 feet, fly 120 feet; climb stone 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +20 (acid, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d8+8 piercing plus 1d8 acid
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d6+8
slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (reach 15 feet), Damage
1d8+7 bludgeoning
ROKIERE
Considered humorless for a copper
dragon, Rokiere keeps her lair
in the hills on Motaku Isle in the
Shackles. It’s rumored that she
knows where vast amounts of
nearby treasure are located, and
she will divulge the location of this
hidden wealth to anyone who can
make her laugh.
D
123

122
Arcane Innate Spells DC 27; 1st grease (at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions]The copper dragon breathes in one of two ways. The dragon can’t
use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Acid (acid, arcane, evocation); The dragon breathes acid in a 60-foot line that
deals 8d6 acid damage (DC 26 basic Fortitude save).
• Slowing Gas (arcane, transmutation); The dragon breathes a 60-foot line of
slowing gas. Each creature in the area must succeed at a DC 26 Fortitude save
or be slowed 1 for 1 round (or slowed 2 on a critical failure).
Climb Stone The dragon’s climb speed functions only when climbing stone surfaces.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The dragon makes two claw Strikes and one tail Strike in any order.
Draconic Momentum When the dragon scores a critical hit with a Strike, it recharges
Breath Weapon.
ADULT COPPER DRAGON CREATURE 12
CG LARGE DRAGON EARTH
Perception +23; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Elven, Gnomish
Skills Acrobatics +21, Athletics +24, Crafting +22, Deception +21, Performance +23,
Society +22, Stealth +21
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +5
AC 33; Fort +23, Ref +22, Will +22; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 235; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 29
Twisting Tail [reaction] As young copper dragon.
Speed 40 feet, fly 140 feet; climb stone 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +26 (acid, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+12 piercing plus 2d8 acid
Melee [one-action] claw +26 (agile, magical), Damage 3d8+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +24 (magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+10 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 33; 4th hideous laughter (at will), shape stone; 1st grease
(at will)
Breath Weapon [two-actions]As young copper dragon, but an 80-foot line, DC 32, and the dragon’s
acid deals 13d6 acid damage.
Climb Stone As young copper dragon.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young copper dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young copper dragon.
ANCIENT COPPER DRAGON CREATURE 17
UNCOMMON CG HUGE DRAGON EARTH
Perception +30; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish
Skills Acrobatics +30, Athletics +31, Crafting +31, Deception +29, Performance +31,
Society +29, Stealth +30
Str +8, Dex +5, Con +5, Int +6, Wis +5, Cha +6
AC 41; Fort +30, Ref +32, Will +32; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 345; Immunities acid, paralyzed, sleep
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 35
Slow Aura (arcane, aura, enchantment) 10 feet. Each creature that ends its turn in the
aura must succeed at a DC 37 Will saving throw or be slowed 1 for 1 round (or slowed 2
on a critical failure). The copper dragon can turn this aura on or off with a single action,
which has the concentrate trait, and can choose not to affect allies within the aura.
Twisting Tail [reaction] As young copper dragon.
Speed 50 feet, fly 200 feet; climb stone 50 feet,
Melee [one-action] jaws +33 (acid, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+16 piercing plus 3d8 acid
Melee [one-action] claw +33 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+16 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +31 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+14 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 39; 5th hideous laughter (at will), wall of stone; 4th shape stone
(at will); 1st grease (at will)
COPPER DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Copper dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells.
YOUNG COPPER DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 27,
attack +20; 3rd dispel magic, haste,
meld into stone; 2nd glitterdust,
invisibility, see invisibility; 1st fleet
step, illusory object, magic aura;
Cantrips (3rd) detect magic, ghost
sound, message, read aura
ADULT COPPER DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 33,
attack +26; As young copper
dragon, plus 5th false vision,
hallucination, tongues; 4th
confusion, creation, stoneskin;
Cantrips (5th) detect magic, ghost
sound, message, read aura
ANCIENT COPPER DRAGON
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 39,
attack +33; As adult copper
dragon, plus 8th maze, prismatic
wall; 7th prismatic spray, project
image, reverse gravity; 6th mislead,
phantasmal calamity, teleport;
Cantrips (8th) detect magic, ghost
sound, message, read aura
D
123

122
Breath Weapon [two-actions]As young copper dragon, but a 100-foot line, DC 38, and the dragon’s
acid deals 18d6 acid damage.
Climb Stone As young copper dragon.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young copper dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young copper dragon.
Mass Laughter [two-actions] (arcane, emotion, enchantment, mental); Frequency once per
day. Effect The copper dragon tells a fantastic joke. Each creature in a 100-foot
emanation must succeed at a DC 39 Will save or suffer the effects of a 9th-level
hideous laughter spell for 1 minute.
Gold Dragon
Gold dragons are the epitome of metallic dragonkind, unrivaled in their
strength as well as their wisdom. They command the unwavering reverence
of all other metallic dragons, who view gold dragons as their leaders and
counselors. Golds rival the raw power of even red dragons, much to the chagrin
of their chromatic cousins, and the two races are often regarded as bitter rivals.
But despite their incredible power, gold dragons are fond of discourse and
prefer to talk through solutions to problems rather than
rely upon brute strength. Long-lived as they are,
they necessarily take a wide view of all situations
and never act without considering all possible
options and outcomes. Because of this, gold
dragons willingly converse with any
creature that seeks them out, even evil
chromatic dragons. Mortals might
find this behavior strange, considering the longstanding war between chromatic and metallic
dragons, but dragons know all too well
that desperate situations sometimes call
for drastic alliances. And although gold
dragons might consider brief truces with
their chromatic brethren in the case
of world-ending threats, they also
know when such alliances have run
their course.
When another metallic dragon
faces a quandary or a foe beyond its
own ability to overcome, its best
option is often to seek the counsel
of the eternally wise and gloriously
righteous gold dragons. Locating
these legendary beings is no easy
task, however, for gold dragons are
notoriously reclusive. Their intellect
and wisdom is such that they prefer
to ponder the great questions of life
in seclusion, where they strive to
formulate solutions to the world’s
most pressing problems. As a
result, gold dragons are sometimes
absent when metallic dragons gather
together, or are missing from tribunals
where their counsel would be
beneficial. Impatient dragons sometimes
begrudge gold dragons for this apparent
unreliability, but such aspersions are
usually a result of jealousy rather than
PARNONERYX
This adult gold dragon had a long
and tragic existence. Formerly an
ally of Iomedae, he was defeated
by a powerful white dragon and
imprisoned in ice. Though freed by
the Glorious Reclamation, he was
soon slain by evil adventurers who
used his head to create a powerful
weapon known as a tathlum-
which was used to lift the siege of
Citadel Rivad and end the Glorious
Reclamation.
D
125

124
any true criticism; in their hearts, other dragons know that few gold dragons
purposefully exclude themselves from truly important matters.
A gold dragon’s incredible foresight and unparalleled enlightenment means
they are unlikely to interfere in the business of individual mortals, though the
rare person who captures the attention of a gold dragon is fortunate indeed, for
there are few beings in the cosmos who can offer such prudent and considerate
advice. Rulers and individuals in stations of high power have an easier time of
garnering the aid of a gold dragon; entire wars have been avoided thanks to a
gold dragon’s last-minute intermediation.
Gold dragons are often found in warm grasslands and savannas, lands
where they can enjoy long, meditative flights without attracting the attention
of potential enemies. They tend to sleep either out in the open in a barren,
remote place, or within a heavily secreted or fortified lair, such as a forgotten
sink hole or in the labyrinthine caverns of a terrestrial chasm. Gold dragons
may enlist trusted servants and allies to guard their lairs, though many live
truly solitary lives, preferring to protect their hoards with nonlethal traps and
magical wards.
YOUNG GOLD DRAGON CREATURE 11
LG LARGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +21; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +17, Arcana +18, Athletics +23, Diplomacy +23, Medicine +21,
Religion +21, Society +18
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +4
AC 32; Fort +22, Ref +20, Will +22; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 230; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 10
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 27
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Speed 40 feet, fly 140 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +24 (fire, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+12 piercing plus 2d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +24 (agile), Damage 2d10+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +22 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] horns +22 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12+10 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 29; 3rd locate (gems only); 1st detect alignment (evil only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions]The gold dragon breathes in one of two ways. The dragon can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Flame (arcane, evocation, fire); The dragon breathes a blast of flame in a 30-foot
cone that deals 11d6 fire damage (DC 31 basic Reflex save).
• Weakening Gas (arcane, necromancy); The dragon breathes a blast of weakening
gas. Each creature within a 30-foot cone must succeed at a DC 31 Fortitude save
or become enfeebled 1 for 1 minute (or enfeebled 2 on a critical failure).
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The gold dragon makes two claw Strikes and one horns Strike in
any order.
Draconic Momentum When the gold dragon scores a critical hit with a Strike, it recharges
Breath Weapon.
ADULT GOLD DRAGON CREATURE 15
LG HUGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +29; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +22, Arcana +24, Athletics +28, Diplomacy +29, Medicine +27,
Religion +29, Society +26
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +6, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +4
AC 38; Fort +28, Ref +25, Will +28; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 330; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 15
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 33
GOLD DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Gold dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells. Unlike
most dragons, they cast divine spells
instead of arcane.
YOUNG GOLD DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells DC 29,
attack +24; 4th discern lies, heal,
restoration; 3rd dispel magic, haste,
heal; 2nd restoration, resist energy,
see invisibility, silence; 1st alarm,
mending, protection, spirit link;
Cantrips (4th) daze, detect magic,
forbidding ward, prestidigitation,
read aura
ADULT GOLD DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells DC 35,
attack +30; As young gold dragon,
plus 6th blade barrier, heal, true
seeing; 5th banishment, breath of
life, sending; Cantrips (6th) daze,
detect magic, forbidding ward,
prestidigitation, read aura
ANCIENT GOLD DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells DC 41,
attack +38; As adult gold dragon, plus
9th foresight, heal, overwhelming
presence; 8rd discern location, divine
aura, heal; 7th dimensional lock,
energy aegis, spell turning; Cantrips
(9th) daze, detect magic, forbidding
ward, prestidigitation, read aura
D
125

124
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Golden Luck [reaction] Trigger The gold dragon fails a saving throw. Effect The dragon improves
its result by one degree of success, turning a failure into a success or a critical failure
into a normal failure. The dragon can’t use this ability again for 1d4 rounds.
Speed 50 feet, fly 180 feet, swim 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +30 (fire, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d12+15 piercing plus 3d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +30 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +28 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+13 slashing
Melee [one-action] horns +28 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+13 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 35; 7th sunburst; 3rd locate (gems only), 1st detect alignment
(evil only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions] As young gold dragon, but a 40-foot cone, DC 37, the dragon’s
flame deals 15d6 fire damage, and the dragon’s weakening gas causes enfeebled 2
(enfeebled 3 on a critical failure).
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young gold dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young gold dragon.
ANCIENT GOLD DRAGON CREATURE 20
UNCOMMON LG GARGANTUAN DRAGON FIRE
Perception +36; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 80 feet
Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish, Jotun, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +29, Arcana +31, Athletics +35, Diplomacy +35, Medicine +36,
Religion +36, Society +35
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +8, Int +7, Wis +8, Cha +5
AC 46; Fort +37, Ref +34, Will +39; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 450; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 20
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 39
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Jaws only.
Extra Reaction The dragon gains 2 reactions at the start of its turn each round.
Golden Luck [reaction] As adult gold dragon.
Speed 60 feet, fly 200 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +38 (fire, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d12+17 piercing plus 4d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +38 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d10+17 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +36 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage 4d10+15 slashing
Melee [one-action] horns +36 (agile, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+15 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 41; 10th sunburst; 3rd locate (gems only); 1st detect alignment
(evil only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions]As a young gold dragon, but a 50-foot cone, DC 44, the dragon’s
flame deals 20d6 fire damage, and the dragon’s weakening gas causes enfeebled 3
(enfeebled 4 on a critical failure).
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]As young gold dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young gold dragon.
Silver Dragon
Silver dragons are among the most chivalrous of all dragonkind; they wield frost
and cold as weapons, can walk on clouds, and dwell high upon snowy mountain
peaks or deep in steep, misty valleys. Although they typically make their lairs
among the highlands, the pursuit of justice leads silver dragons to travel far
and wide-often into the very heart of realms overrun by evil. These exemplars
of righteousness are ceaseless in their determination to help the weak, spread
honor, and stamp out evil.
Silver dragons are sleek and sinuous. Their hides resemble nothing so much
as a suit of gleaming armor, lending further credence to the popular myth that
silver dragons are the paladins of dragonkind. The zeal with which they seek
out, confront, and defeat evil is unsurpassed even among their metallic cousins,
and they adhere to strict codes of honor usually passed down from parent to
hatchling. On occasion, they instead learn these codes from trusted mentors,
APSU
Apsu, the Waybringer, is the god
of good dragons, leadership, and
peace. According to draconic lore,
Apsu spawned the dragon-gods
who created the world. One of his
sons is the destructive draconic
god Dahak. Thus, Apsu is not only
seen as a god and creator to good
dragons, but he also serves as an
immortal father figure.
D
127

126
usually other silver dragons or gold dragons. As they age, they become even
more dedicated to their codes, often adding new and even more restrictive
clauses to the systems that guide their behavior.
Silver dragons are incredibly altruistic and regularly consort with the citizens
of goodly societies, of which they consider themselves protectors and guides.
In addition to responding to evil threats, silver dragons work to prevent evil
from taking root in the first place, and they ensure mortals under their care are
well fed, educated, and treated with dignity. Although silver dragons can seem
overzealous or even eager to join the fight against evil, they know that the best
way to rid the world of corruption is to stamp out strife and disillusionment
at their source, not to passively sit back and watch it grow into an unsolvable
problem. Silver dragons can be vindictive, but they can also be forgiving; for
evildoers who seek to atone for their sins and turn over a new leaf, the support
of a silver dragon is both unwavering and invaluable.
Many silver dragons are also drawn to religious endeavors, venerating
deities such as Iomedae, Sarenrae, and other deities concerned with justice,
virtue, and redemption.
YOUNG SILVER DRAGON CREATURE 10
LG LARGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +20; darkvision, fog vision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +22, Diplomacy +18, Intimidation +20, Medicine +20,
Religion +18, Society +14
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +4
Fog Vision The silver dragon ignores the concealed condition from fog and clouds.
AC 31; Fort +20, Ref +17, Will +21
HP 200; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 10
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 28
Wing Deflection [reaction] Trigger The silver dragon is targeted with an attack. Effect The dragon
raises its wing, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering attack. If
the dragon is flying, it descends 10 feet after the attack is complete.
Speed 40 feet, fly 100 feet; cloud walk
Melee [one-action] jaws +23 (cold, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+12 piercing plus 2d6 cold
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile), Damage 2d8+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +21 (reach 15 feet), Damage 1d10+10 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 28; 1st detect alignment (evil only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions]The silver dragon breathes in one of two ways. The dragon can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Frost (arcane, cold, evocation); The dragon breathes a cloud of frost in a 30-foot cone
that deals 10d6 cold damage (DC 29 basic Reflex save).
• Paralyzing Gas (arcane, enchantment, incapacitation); The dragon breathes a
blast of paralyzing gas. Each creature within a 30-foot cone must succeed at a
DC 29 Fortitude save or be slowed 1 for 1 round (or paralyzed for 1 round on a
critical failure).
Cloud Walk The silver dragon can tread on clouds or fog as though on solid ground.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The silver dragon makes two claw Strikes and one tail Strike in
any order.
Draconic Momentum When the silver dragon scores a critical hit with a Strike, it
recharges its Breath Weapon.
ADULT SILVER DRAGON CREATURE 14
LG HUGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +26; darkvision, fog vision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Dwarven
Skills Acrobatics +21, Athletics +27, Diplomacy +25, Intimidation +27, Medicine +24,
Religion +24, Society +20
SILVER DRAGON
SPELLCASTERS
Silver dragon spellcasters tend to
cast the following spells. Unlike
most dragons, they cast divine
spells instead of arcane.
YOUNG SILVER DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells
DC 28, attack +23; 4th freedom
of movement, read omens,
restoration; 3rd heal, paralyze,
wall of wind; 2nd augury, calm
emotions, restoration, see
invisibility; 1st alarm, bless,
protection, true strike; Cantrips
(4th) detect magic, light, message,
read aura, stabilize
ADULT SILVER DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells DC 33,
attack +29; As young silver
dragon, plus 6th repulsion, true
seeing, zealous conviction; 5th
banishment, heal, sending; Cantrips
(6th) detect magic, light, message,
read aura, stabilize
ANCIENT SILVER DRAGON
Divine Prepared Spells DC 40,
attack +36; As adult silver dragon,
plus 8rd discern location, divine
decree, heal; 7th divine decree,
energy aegis, plane shift; Cantrips
(8th) detect magic, light, message,
read aura, stabilize
D
127
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
126
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +5
Fog Vision As young silver dragon.
AC 37; Fort +26, Ref +23, Will +28; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 295; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 10
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 33
Wing Deflection
[reaction] As young silver dragon.
Speed 50 feet, fly 140 feet; cloud walk
Melee
[one-action] jaws +29 (cold, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 3d10+13
piercing plus 3d6 cold
Melee
[one-action]claw +29 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+13 slashing
Melee
[one-action] tail +27 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+11 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 33; 1st detect alignment (evil only)
Breath Weapon
[two-actions] As young silver dragon, but a 40-foot cone, DC
35, the dragon’s frost deals 15d6 cold damage, and the dragon’s
paralyzing gas makes the creature slowed 2 for 1 round (or paralyzed
for 2 rounds on a critical failure).
Cloud Walk As young silver dragon.
Draconic Frenzy
[two-actions]As young silver dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young silver dragon.
ANCIENT SILVER DRAGON CREATURE 19
UNCOMMON LG GARGANTUAN COLD DRAGON
Perception +32; darkvision, fog vision, scent (imprecise)
60 feet
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Dwarven, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +27, Athletics +38, Diplomacy +34, Intimidation +37,
Medicine +33, Religion +32, Society +30
Str +9, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +5, Wis +5, Cha +7
Fog Vision As young silver dragon.
AC 45; Fort +34, Ref +31, Will +34; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 410; Immunities cold, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses fire 15
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 90 feet, DC 40
Cold Aura (cold, aura) 15 feet, 3d6 cold damage. The silver
dragon can turn this aura on or off as a single action, which
has the concentrate trait, and can choose not to affect allies
within the aura.
Reflect Spell
[reaction] Trigger The silver dragon critically succeeds
at a saving throw against a spell, or a caster trying to target
the dragon critically fails their attack roll. Effect The spell is
reflected back upon the caster, with the effect of spell turning
.
Wing Deflection
[reaction] As young silver dragon.
Speed 60 feet, fly 180 feet; cloud walk
Melee
[one-action] jaws +37 (cold, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage
4d10+17 piercing plus 4d6 cold
Melee
[one-action] claw +37 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage
4d8+17 slashing
Melee
[one-action] tail +35 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage
3d10+15 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 40; 1st detect alignment
(evil only)
Breath Weapon
[two-actions] As young silver dragon, but
a 50-foot cone, DC 42, the frost deals 20d6 cold
damage, and the paralyzing gas makes the creature
paralyzed for 1 round (or 3 rounds on a critical failure).
Cloud Walk As young silver dragon.
Draconic Frenzy
[two-actions]As young silver dragon.
Draconic Momentum As young silver dragon.
D
129

128
Dragon Turtle
When sailors warn others of the terrible threats of the open sea, they seldom
forget to mention dragon turtles-immense aquatic dragons with rocky
shells similar to those of tortoises and flippers powerful enough to overturn
hardy vessels. These fearsome creatures enjoy being considered as dangerous
as storms or natural disasters by seafaring folk. Dragon turtles delight in
amassing treasure, although most prefer to receive tribute from passing sailors
and often store their hoards in the shipwrecks of vessels once crewed by those
unwilling to surrender their valuables. Dragon turtles are solitary creatures
and hunt in regions encompassing a hundred square miles or more. Although
they normally eat large fish, they are omnivorous and also eat seaweed or even
foolhardy dragon hunters. Experienced sailors keep a keen eye out for dragon
turtles, preparing to flee should one approach or offer it treasure in exchange
for safe passage.
Most dragon turtles are at least 20 feet wide and 50 feet long, although
some can grow substantially larger. These massive, ancient dragon turtles are
somnolent, and resemble rocky islands from a distance; their prodigious hoards
can be a source of truly ancient sea lore. Legends persist of truly immense
dragon turtles who spend centuries drifting on the surface of the ocean, far from
established shipping lanes or charted waters, with shells that serve as islands
capable of supporting entire ecosystems and even, some claim, small settlements
whose inhabitants know nothing of land that doesn’t drift across the sea.
DRAGON TURTLE CREATURE 9
N HUGE AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Aquan, Common, Draconic
Skills Athletics +21, Diplomacy +16, Intimidate +18, Stealth +13, Survival +17
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +1
AC 29; Fort +19, Ref +15, Will +16
HP 140; Immunities fire, paralyzed, sleep
Shell Block [reaction] Trigger A creature adjacent to the dragon turtle targets it with a melee
attack. Effect The dragon turtle rolls its shell toward the triggering creature, gaining
a +2 circumstance bonus to its AC against the triggering attack.
Speed 20 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee jaws [one-action] +21 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+9 piercing
Melee claw [one-action] +21 (agile), Damage 2d8+9 slashing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (air, fire, primal) The dragon turtle breathes
a massive blast of steam that deals 10d6 fire damage to
creatures within a 50-foot
cone (DC 27 basic Reflex
save). This steam blast affects
creatures within the water,
as well as outside. The
dragon turtle can’t use its
Breath Weapon again for 1d4
rounds or until it takes a critical
hit (whichever comes first).
Capsize [one-action] (attack, move) The
dragon turtle tries to capsize an
adjacent aquatic vessel of its size
or smaller. The dragon turtle must
succeed at an Athletics check with
a DC of 30 or the pilot’s Sailing Lore
DC, whichever is higher.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The dragon turtle makes two claw Strikes and one jaws
Strike in any order.
DRAGON TURTLE
TREASURE
Dragon turtles keep their
treasure in shipwrecks at the
bottom of the ocean. Their
hoards usually contain coins,
jewelry, and magic items that can
survive lengthy submersion.
DRAGON TURTLE
LOCATIONS
Although most dragon turtles hunt
in the open ocean, some live along
coastlines or even within large
inland lakes.
D
129

128
DRAKAUTHIX SPORELINGS
When a new drakauthix bursts
forth from a spore-infested corpse,
it has no true way of defending
itself. However, a sporeling does
not need to hunt until it grows
much larger. Each sporeling
harvests enough material from
the body it emerged from to grow
to its full size over a few short
days. After it has done so, the
drakauthix detaches from the cave
ceiling and, starving, immediately
seeks out its first meal in the
cavern below.
Drakauthix
The drakauthix is a massive fungus that floats through the heights of the largest
Darklands caverns, propelled by bladders that spray air and spores. A voracious
but slow-moving hunter, the drakauthix prefers to ambush meaty creatures
from above, using its hooked appendages to pull its victims upward to feed.
The drakauthix’s digestive process is entirely external-it clings to victims,
and its spore-laden surface slowly feeds on and grows through the flesh before
the spore-infested carcass is discarded. As the infested body strikes the ground
below, it bursts and releases a cloud of spores, unleashing a host of young called
sporelings that immediately scuttle up the cavern walls to cling to its ceiling
and grow.
The drakauthix behaves no more intelligently than most predatory animals,
and often uses a sort of symbiotic scavenger method to secure prey by capitalizing
on the hunting methods of oozes and vermin found in the large cave systems
it frequents. When a relatively mindless creature kills a victim, the drakauthix
drifts down, hooks the freshly slain carcass with its tendrils, and reels in its meal.
The mindless ooze or other creature that just had its food stolen rarely holds a
grudge and simply slithers off to find a new quarry, letting the drakauthix digest
the corpse in peace. Of course, the drakauthix isn’t above feasting on more active
prey as well, and might attack an adventurer who neglects to look upward for
danger when exploring a network of mysterious caves.
Some Darklands-dwelling creatures, such as duergars, hunt drakauthixes for
their flesh, which has a unique flavor with a peppery aftertaste. Subterranean
races also make ink from drakauthixes by burning their carcasses, then grinding
and pressing the ashes for a long time until a silvery substance congeals.
DRAKAUTHIX CREATURE 9
N HUGE FUNGUS
Perception +17; darkvision, sporesight (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +20, Stealth +17
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Sporesight The drakauthix exudes a cloud of spores that it uses to see.
This is an imprecise sense that functions only in areas without
strong wind currents. Sporesight does not function underwater.
AC 25; Fort +21, Ref +13, Will +15
HP 190; Weaknesses fire 10, slashing 10
Obscuring Spores Whenever the drakauthix takes at
least 10 slashing damage, it releases a cloud of brown
spores that has the effect of obscuring mist for 1 minute,
centered around the drakauthix. This cloud of spores
does not move with the drakauthix, nor is it displaced by
its movement.
Speed fly 20 feet
Melee [one-action] tentacle +20 (reach 30 feet), Damage 3d8+9
piercing plus Improved Grab
Reel In [one-action] The drakauthix pulls all creatures it has
grabbed 15 feet closer to itself.
Spore Tendrils [one-action] The tendrils that cover the
drakauthix’s body reach out and infest adjacent
creatures, dealing 4d6 poison damage and 1d6
persistent poison damage. A creature can attempt a
basic DC 27 Reflex save to reduce this damage, but
one grabbed by the drakauthix takes a –4 circumstance
penalty to this save.
Whirlwind of Hooks [two-actions] The drakauthix whirls, whipping creatures
around it. The drakauthix makes a tentacle Strike against every
creature within its reach.
D
131

130
DRAKE ECOLOGY
Drakes reach maturity and
reproduce much earlier than
dragons, meaning that they are a
far more common threat than their
more powerful forebears. Drakes
have few qualms about dwelling
with one another (provided they
are the same species), often
establishing dens in pockets of
wilderness suitable to their needs,
such as swampy grottoes, shallow
shoreline caves, or cliffside perches.
Drake
Ravenous, bestial, and driven by instinct-drakes are primitive draconic monsters
who bear a fraction of the terrifying might of their larger cousins but little (if any)
of the cunning. While they’re weaker, slower, and less inclined toward reason than
dragons, drakes are nonetheless a menace to creatures and settlements around
them. Their propensity for forming raiding parties-small social groups fittingly
called “rampages”-makes them all the more dangerous; a single rampage of
river drakes can quickly lay waste to a waterside village, and roving rampages of
desert drakes are a plague to caravan traders.
Drakes share a number of physical characteristics that unite them as one
species despite their wide variety of habitats and abilities. For example, drakes
lack forearms, leaving them only their formidable jaws and thick-scaled tails
with which to attack if engaged at melee range. Most drakes would rather avoid
close combat, however, preferring to use their breath weapons to wreak havoc in
wide swaths from comfortable distances while flying overhead. Finally, all drakes
have small reservoirs of their ancestral draconic power that they can tap into to
perform incredible feats of speed.
Drake Eggs
While drake hides aren’t any more valuable than those of other, similarly sized
creatures, drake eggs are prized commodities. While they are used as components
in powerful spells as well as eaten by various cultures, the most common use for
drake eggs is hatching and rearing drakes to serve as mounts and guardians.
A typical drake lays a clutch of 2d4 eggs every 5 years. Eggs hatch within 3
to 6 weeks, during which time they must be kept in conditions appropriate to
their natural environment, perhaps the most difficult aspect of drake husbandry.
While it is generally easy for breeders to incubate the eggs of desert or jungle
drakes (which require mildly warm temperatures to hatch) or river drakes
(which must be submerged in running water), the eggs of flame and frost
drakes require extreme temperatures in order to hatch, which can be difficult
to replicate safely.
A drake egg has Hardness 3, 5 HP, and BT 5. The
coloration of drake eggs varies only slightly
from one species to the next. A creature
must succeed at a DC 20 Nature check,
or a relevant DC 20 Lore check, to
identify the drake species of a
specific egg.
Once a drake
hatches, it imprints
on the first creature
that it sees. A creature imprinted on in
this way gains a +5 bonus to Nature
checks to train or command that
drake. The market price of a drake
egg varies depending on the region, the type
of drake, and the exact purpose the buyer has
in mind, but typically depends on the level of
the drake. Because drakes are evil, dangerous,
and intelligent creatures, many societies do not
condone the trade of drake eggs and criminalize
those who engage in it.
It takes 2 years for a drake hatchling to grow to full
size. A well-trained drake can make a fearsome mount
or guardian, but many careless would-be drake trainers
are devoured by their charges due to cruelty, overconfidence,
or general lack of skill.
D
131

130
DRAKE TREASURE
Drakes share dragon’s interest
in treasure, but lack dragons’
discerning taste. A drake hoard
will certainly contain coins,
jewelry, gemstones, gear, and
even the odd magic item or
two, but the bulk of the hoard
invariably consists of broken
weapons, shiny rocks, bits of
junk, and other doubtful
pieces of refuse.
River Drake
Although the glistening scales and sleek, fin-like wings on these drakes give them
an appearance reminiscent of river fish, they are actually distant relatives of the
black dragon. While smaller than most drakes, river drakes are more than capable
of plaguing river travelers and are equally at home above and below the water’s
surface. This flexibility allows them to catch a wide variety of prey, from fish and
boggards to deer and the occasional ferry passenger.
RIVER DRAKE CREATURE 3
NE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON WATER
Perception +9; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +10, Intimidation +6, Stealth +9, Survival +7
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 19; Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 45; Immunities paralyzed, unconscious; Resistances acid 10
Tail Lash [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the river drake’s tail uses an action
to Strike or attempt a skill check. Effect The river drake attempts to Strike the
triggering creature with its tail. If it hits, the creature takes a –2 circumstance penalty
to the triggering roll.
Speed 20 feet, fly 50 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +12, Damage 2d8+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +12 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+3
bludgeoning
Caustic Mucus [two-actions] (acid, arcane, evocation) The river
drake spits a ball of caustic mucus up to a range
of 50 feet that explodes in a 10-foot burst.
Creatures within the burst take 4d6 acid
damage (DC 19 basic Reflex save). Those that
fail this save also take 1d6 persistent acid
damage and take a –5-foot status penalty to
their Speed. This Speed reduction ends with
the persistent acid damage. The river drake
can’t use Caustic Mucus again for 1d6 rounds.
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The river drake makes one
fangs Strike and two tail Strikes in any order.
Speed Surge [one-action] (move) The river drake moves up to
twice its Speed. It can do this three times per day.
Flame Drake
The distant kin of red dragons, flame drakes thankfully
lack the intelligence and ambition of their larger cousins,
but are no less territorial or violent. Flame drakes dwell
near volcanoes and magma, but it’s not unheard of for
one to drift into nearby areas like forests or wooded hills.
Their scales are usually some shade of red, occasionally fading to smoky
blacks and grays along the edges of their wings and the tips of their tails.
FLAME DRAKE CREATURE 5
CE LARGE DRAGON FIRE
Perception +12; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet,
smoke vision
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +12, Stealth +9, Survival +10
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +0
Smoke Vision Smoke doesn’t impair a flame drake’s vision; it
ignores concealment from smoke.
D
133

132
AC 22; Fort +12, Ref +10, Will +10
HP 75; Immunities fire, paralyzed, unconscious; Weaknesses cold 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Fangs only.
Speed 20 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +14, Damage 2d8+5 piercing plus 1d6 fire
Melee [one-action] tail +14 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+5 bludgeoning
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The flame drake makes two fangs Strikes and one tail Strike in
any order.
Fireball Breath [two-actions](arcane, evocation, fire) The flame drake expels a ball of flame to a
range of 180 feet that explodes in a 20-foot burst. Creatures in the burst take 6d6
fire damage (DC 22 basic Reflex save). The flame drake can’t use Fireball Breath again
for 1d6 rounds.
Speed Surge [one-action] (move) The fire drake moves up to twice its Speed. It can do this three
times per day.
Jungle Drake
Believed to be related to green dragons, jungle drakes are dangerous hunters
equipped with a debilitating venom delivered by a large barbed stinger or
their noxious phlegm. Their wings are equipped with vestigial claws that
allow them to deftly maneuver through thick jungle foliage both in flight
and on foot. Jungle drakes prefer to ambush their prey using hit-and-run
tactics, picking off the weakest members of a group and dragging their
victims off to finish their meals as they please.
JUNGLE DRAKE CREATURE 6
NE LARGE DRAGON EARTH
Perception +13; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +13, Stealth +13, Survival +11
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 23; Fort +17, Ref +13, Will +11
HP 90; Immunities disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Twisting Tail [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the jungle drake’s
stinger uses a move action or leaves a square during a move action
it’s using. Effect The jungle drake Strikes the target with its stinger. If
it hits, the jungle drake disrupts the creature’s action.
Speed 20 feet, fly 50 feet; woodland stride
Melee [one-action] fangs +17, Damage 2d10+7 piercing plus predatory grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+7 piercing plus jungle
drake venom
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions]The jungle drake makes one fangs
Strike and two stinger Strikes in any order.
Jungle Drake Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude
DC 24; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison
and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison and
enfeebled 2 (1 round)
Predatory Grab As Grab, but the jungle drake’s Grab does not
end if it moves away. Instead, it carries the grabbed creature with it. A
jungle drake can’t Fly while grabbing a creature unless that creature can also Fly.
Speed Surge [one-action] (move) The jungle drake moves up to twice its Speed. It can do
this three times per day.
Spit Venom [two-actions](poison) A jungle drake can spit a sticky glob of its venom to a range
of 50 feet that explodes in a 10-foot burst. Those in the burst must succeed at a DC
24 Reflex save or be exposed to jungle drake venom. The jungle drake can’t use Spit
Venom again for 1d6 rounds.
Woodland Stride The jungle drake ignores difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain
from non-magical foliage.
DRAKE HUNTERS
The allure of hunting a dragon
is difficult to resist for many
adventurers, but accomplishing
such a task is fraught with peril.
Unscrupulous adventurers have
been known to instead hunt drakes
and use trophies harvested from
these creatures to deceive locals.
D
133

132
Wyvern
A wyvern is a venomous drake with a well-earned reputation for impatience and
aggression. As much as 15 feet long and weighing up to 1,000 pounds, a wyvern’s
resilient body allows it to crash talons-first into large prey without serious risk
to itself. A wyvern uses its momentum to stun its target before injecting it with
searing venom or carrying it over the side of a nearby cliff. Because a wyvern lacks
the strength to haul its prey all the way to its nest intact, it is far more likely to
lift and drop its victim over a gully or canyon and let gravity do its work before
it descends to pick apart the carcass.
Conversation is of little interest to a wyvern, as the creature
typically speaks only to taunt its prey, issue territorial claims, or
demand tribute. Even so, many wyverns enjoy grim humor and
tales of violent acts, particularly if those acts were committed by
the storyteller. A wyvern properly appeased with meat, entertainment,
and treasure sometimes agrees to provide assistance ranging
from giving directions to serving as a mount for a powerful
humanoid. However, these arrangements rarely last more than a
few weeks before the wyvern’s pride, malice, or insolence inspires
it to flee or even betray its allies. Only the truly cruel can cow a
wyvern into servitude for an extended period, as most wyverns
are so self-interested that they go out of their way to avoid
helping others.
WYVERN CREATURE 6
NE LARGE DRAGON
Perception +13; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +15, Stealth +12
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 24; Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +13
HP 95; Immunities paralyzed, unconscious
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Savage [reaction] Trigger A creature grabbed by the wyvern critically fails
a skill check to Escape. Effect The wyvern makes a stinger Strike against the
triggering creature.
Speed 20 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +17, Damage 2d12+5 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17, Damage 2d8+5 slashing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +15 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+5 piercing plus
wyvern venom
Powerful Dive [two-actions] (move) The wyvern Flies up to its fly Speed and must
both move forward at least 20 feet and descend at least 10 feet. If it
ends the movement within melee reach of at least one enemy its size
or smaller, it can make a claw Strike against that enemy. If the claw
hits, as a free action the wyvern can either automatically Grab the
target or knock it prone.
Punishing Momentum [one-action] Requirements The wyvern grabbed a creature this
turn using Powerful Dive. Effect The wyvern can Fly at half Speed
while holding the creature in its claws, carrying
that creature along with it and dropping it at the
end of its movement. Alternatively, the wyvern
can Strike the creature with its stinger with a +2
circumstance bonus.
Wyvern Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude DC 22;
Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 5d6 poison damage
(1 round); Stage 2 6d6 poison damage (1 round); Stage 3 8d6 poison
damage (1 round)
ARE WYVERNS DRAKES?
Although commonly classified as
drakes, wyverns exhibit significant
differences from most other types
of drakes. While scholars debate
the precise relationship between
them, none dispute that they
exhibit collegial behavior and
general deference to one another. 
D
135

134
Frost Drake
Frost drakes pose an immense danger in the frozen reaches they call home,
where they roam far and wide to hunt for prey such as caribou, wolves, small
bears, and tundra-dwelling people. Related as they are to white dragons, these
drakes share many habits and facets of their disposition with their draconic
cousins. Indeed, just as white dragons are among the most bestial and craven of
dragonkind, frost drakes are among the most depraved and openly malicious
of the drakes. They are also especially insolent, and are less likely to back
down from a fight compared to other drakes. Many frost drakes have met their
ends trying to enact cruelties beyond their means, such as singly taking on an
entire castle or well-fortified township. Although a frost drake can wreak much
destruction on its own, tales of village-dwelling northerners banding together to
defend their homes from these rogue menaces are fairly common.
A frost drake’s hunting grounds are quite large. Those frost drakes that live
upon the permanently frozen peaks of high mountains have been known to
swoop down to snatch up prey from the lowlands, leaving frozen swaths of earth
from their breath as the only sign of their passing. Their frost-covered scales range
from deep royal blue to crisp cyan and sometimes feature sporadic patches of
violet. Their hides are thinner than most drakes’; when a frost drake is inhaling
in preparation to launch its signature frozen breath, the monster’s ice-blue blood
can be seen beneath its scales.
FROST DRAKE CREATURE 7
CE LARGE COLD DRAGON
Perception +14; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet, snow vision
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +17, Intimidation +14, Stealth +15
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +1
Snow Vision Snow doesn’t impair a frost drake’s vision; it ignores concealment from
snowfall.
AC 25; Fort +17, Ref +15, Will +14
HP 115; Immunities cold, paralyzed, unconscious; Weaknesses fire 10
Retaliatory Strike [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the frost drake’s tail
successfully damages the frost drake with a Strike. Effect The frost drake attempts
to Strike with its tail. If the Strike hits, it deals an additional 1d6 damage.
Speed 20 feet, burrow 20 feet (snow only), fly 50 feet, ice climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +17, Damage 2d12+8 piercing plus 1d6 cold
Melee [one-action] tail +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+8 bludgeoning
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The frost drake makes
two gangs Strikes and one tail Strike in
any order.
Freezing Mist Breath [two-actions](arcane, cold,
evocation) The frost drake spits a ball
of liquid up to 60 feet that explodes
into a 20-foot-burst cloud of freezing
mist. Those in the burst take 8d6 cold
damage (DC 25 basic Reflex save). The mist
cakes all surfaces in the area with a sheet of
slippery ice that turns the area into difficult
terrain for 2d4 rounds. It can’t use Freezing Mist
Breath again for 1d6 rounds.
Ice Climb A frost drake can climb on ice as though
it had the listed climb Speed. It ignores difficult terrain
and greater difficult terrain from ice and snow and doesn’t
risk falling when crossing ice.
Speed Surge [one-action] (move) The frost drake moves up to
twice its Speed. It can do this three times per day.
DRAKE RESOURCES
While every adventurer knows
that dragon hide can be crafted
into potent armor or weapons,
drake hide holds no such intrinsic
value. Nonetheless, drake
scales and horns are physically
impressive, and to the uneducated
buyer, might seem at first glance
to be legitimate. Unscrupulous
leatherworkers have been known
to use drake hides to craft and
sell counterfeit dragonhide
armor, so potential buyers
should remain on the
lookout for scams. 
D
135

134
Desert Drake
Distant cousins of blue dragons that lack their relatives’ magical talents and
intelligence, these desert-dwelling drakes are nonetheless dangerous ambush
predators, preying upon isolated desert travelers and outposts for food and
supplies. They retain their true-blooded forebears’ resistance to electricity and
affinity for sandy environs. Desert drakes’ scales range in coloration from rustbrown to light tan and ocher shades, mimicking the colors of the dunes they
call home.
Desert drakes are among the lightest and most compact of the drakes, though
this shouldn’t be mistaken for frailty. Their swooped-back horns and featherthin wings are adapted to make burrowing as easy as possible. Indeed, a desert
drake’s powerful neck makes wriggling through sand and other loose scree as
easy as walking for it.
DESERT DRAKE CREATURE 8
NE LARGE DRAGON EARTH
Perception +15; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +17, Athletics +18, Intimidation +13, Stealth +15, Survival +15
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +5, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +1
AC 27; Fort +17, Ref +15, Will +13
HP 135; Immunities paralyzed, unconscious; Resistances electricity 16
Wing Deflection [reaction] Trigger The desert drake is targeted with an attack. Effect The desert
drake raises its wing, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering
attack. If the desert drake is flying at the time it is attacked, it descends 10 feet after
the attack is complete.
Speed 20 feet; burrow 20 feet (sand only), fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +20, Damage 2d12+8 piercing plus 1d6 electricity
Melee [one-action] tail +20 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+8 bludgeoning plus Push 5 feet
Draconic Frenzy [two-actions] The desert drake makes two fangs Strikes and one tail Strike in
any order.
Sandstorm Breath [two-actions] (arcane, electricity, evocation) The desert drake spits
a ball of electrically charged sand to a range of 60 feet that
explodes into a cloud with a 15-foot-radius burst.
Creatures in the area take 9d6 electricity damage (DC
27 basic Reflex save). The cloud remains for 1d4 rounds,
granting concealment to everything within. The desert
drake can’t use Sandstorm Breath again for
1d6  rounds.
Speed Surge [one-action] (move) The desert drake moves up to
twice its Speed. The desert drake can do this three
times per day.
Surprise Attacker On the first round of combat,
creatures that haven’t acted yet are flat-footed
to the desert drake.
OTHER DRAKES
The drakes presented on these
pages are far from the only types
that exist. Forest drakes have green
hides, spit acidic clouds, and can be
found in temperate woodlands. Rift
drakes, among the most powerful
of their kind, spit clinging caustic
vapors and dwell in badlands and
regions scarred by devastating
magical disasters. Sea drakes can be
found in oceans across the world,
lava drakes in volcanic crevasses,
mist drakes along coastlines and in
salt marshes, and spire drakes in
ragged, rocky hills. Undoubtedly,
many other types of drakes lurk in
the far corners of the world!
D
137

136
Drow
The first drow were elves who fled into the depths of the world from a devastating
cataclysm thousands of years ago. In their journey below, they fell to bickering
and in-fighting, drawing the attention of sinister intelligences beyond their own.
Whether it was the influence of a specific demon lord, the Rough Beast Rovagug,
or some other fell force is unknown, but in that time the elves transformed both
spiritually and physically, tainting their hearts with desires for cruelty, sadism,
and violence. The hues of their eyes became sinister red or bleached white, and
their flesh adopted an unearthly lavender sheen that made the drow instantly
recognizable. The drow also developed potent magical abilities and resistances
that further empowered them, if at the cost of their souls.
Over the centuries to follow, the drow developed into a powerful, if violently
dysfunctional society, influenced by the worship of demon lords and focused on
providing power and glory to a relatively small collection of noble houses. Many
of these noble houses are matriarchal in nature and all hold allegiance to a specific
demon lord patron-but traditions of worship, warfare, and wizardry help to
bind the oft-bickering houses together enough that drow society doesn’t simply
consume itself from within. Fear of earning the wrath of one’s superior-be it a
teacher, a parent, a commander, or the demon one worships-is the real bond
holding drow society together, and this system is held in esteem by the lowliest
drow servant and by the most powerful drow priestess alike.
The drow are infamous throughout the world, but until recently most assumed
stories of demon-worshipping, underground-dwelling elves were spooky legends
crafted to share around a campfire. Today, the existence of drow is an understood
truth, and while their presence in the dark caverns deep below is unsettling, they
seem content to leave the surface world alone for now.
Drow Fighter
Drow fighters train to master techniques that inflict deep, bleeding wounds and
use poisoned crossbow bolts to exhaust enemies.
DROW FIGHTER CREATURE 1
CE MEDIUM DROW ELF HUMANOID
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Elven, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +5, Intimidation +3, Stealth +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items hand crossbow (10 bolts), leather armor, lethargy poison (2; Pathfinder Core
Rulebook 552), rapier
Light Blindness
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +4; +1 status to all saves vs. magic, +2 status to all
saves vs. mental
HP 18; Immunities sleep
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] rapier +9 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Melee [one-action] main-gauche +9 (agile, disarm, finesse, parry, versatile S), Damage
1d4+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +9 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6+1 piercing plus lethargy poison
Divine Innate Spells DC 14; 2nd darkness (at will), faerie fire (at will);
Cantrips (2nd) dancing lights
Quick Draw [one-action] The drow fighter draws a weapon using the Interact action,
then Strikes with that weapon.
Skewer [two-actions]The drow fighter Strikes with its rapier, and gains a
+1 circumstance bonus to the attack roll. A creature damaged by
the attack takes 1d6 persistent bleed damage.
BECOMING A DROW
Rarely, when a surface elf
commits an act of cruelty heinous
enough to draw the attention of a
demon lord, transformation into a
drow can happen spontaneously-
but these transformations are
rare enough to be legends in their
own right. No known instance of a
drow reverting to an elf has ever
been recorded.
D
137

136
Drow Rogue
Loners at heart, drow rogues trust no one-least of all fellow slayers. Thees drow rely
on awareness and adaptation to survive the cutthroat nature of their society.
DROW ROGUE CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM DROW ELF HUMANOID
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Elven, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +8, Deception +7, Society +4, Stealth +10, Thievery +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +0, Cha +1
Items hand crossbow (10 bolts), lethargy poison (2; Pathfinder Core Rulebook 552),
shortsword, studded leather armor
Light Blindness
AC 19; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +6; +1 status to all saves vs. magic, +2 status to all saves
vs. mental
HP 26; Immunities sleep
Nimble Dodge [reaction] Requirement A drow rogue can’t use this reaction while encumbered.
Trigger The drow rogue is hit or critically hit by an attack made by a creature the drow
rogue can see. Effect The drow rogue gains a +2 circumstance bonus to their Armor
Class against the triggering attack.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +10 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+4
piercing
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +10 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1),
Damage 1d6 piercing plus lethargy poison
Divine Innate Spells DC 16; 2nd darkness (at will), faerie fire (at will);
Cantrips (2nd) dancing lights
Quick Draw [one-action] As drow fighter.
Sneak Attack The drow rogue deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Drow Priestess
Many drow priestesses venerate demon lords and other foul divinities.
DROW PRIESTESS CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM DROW ELF HUMANOID
Perception +9; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Elven, Undercommon
Skills Deception +8, Intimidation +8, Religion +9, Society +5, Stealth +7
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +1
Items chain mail, hand crossbow (10 bolts), steel shield (Hardness 5, HP 20, BT 10),
lethargy poison (4; Pathfinder Core Rulebook 552), rapier, religious symbol
Light Blindness
AC 20 (22 with shield raised); Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +11; +1 status to all saves vs.
magic, +2 status to all saves vs. mental
HP 39; Immunities sleep
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] rapier +9 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +9 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6 piercing plus lethargy poison
Divine Prepared Spells DC 21; 2nd harm (×3), silence, spiritual weapon;
1st bless, command, fear; Cantrips (2nd) detect magic, guidance, know
direction, read aura, stabilize
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 4th darkness; 3rd dispel
magic, levitate (×3); 2nd darkness (at will), faerie
fire (at will); 1st command (at will); Cantrips (4th)
dancing lights
DROW EXILES
While drow society is evil, not all
drow are bound to these norms.
Those who seek something
better in life are invariably exiles
and often flee to the surface to
escape their sinister kin. These
drow often live as hermits, or
they seek out societies where
others have yet to hear the
legends regarding their kind.
D
139

138
OCCULT TRADITIONS
Unlike classical dwarven
practitioners of magic, duergars
have embraced the practice of
occultism. All duergars have at
least a few innate occult spells,
primary among them being the
ability to magically increase their
size. This power not only aids
them in intimidating and bullying
their slaves, but also serves as
a potent combat option against
their many enemies.
Duergar
Deep beneath the surface, duergars stubbornly claim the ancestral subterranean
homelands of the dwarves as their own, having refused to venture to the
surface along with their modern dwarven cousins. An exiled dwarven deity
named Droskar offered duergars salvation from the horrors of the Darklands,
and in exchange duergars endlessly toil in his honor within their subterranean
empire. Notorious slavers, duergars regularly raid other Darklands settlements
as well as surface communities in constant search of living beings to task with
endless amounts of work in their harsh and exhausting settlements.
Duergars are gray-skinned creatures, often referred to as “ashen” by those
surface dwarves willing to speak of them. These subterranean dwarves have a
strong natural connection with cave-dwelling vermin, and it’s common to see
duergar caravans drawn by teams of immense beetles. Most duergars devote
themselves to the worship of Droskar, a taskmaster of a god who demands
back-breaking toil in addition to regular prayer. Duergar leadership often
consists of powerful divine servants of Droskar, along with incredibly stout
warriors whose martial prowess ensures they can overcome any direct threat
to their rule. Almost every aspect of duergar society is controlled by a strict
hierarchy of leadership, with taskmasters directing subordinates across all
walks of life.
Duergar Sharpshooter
Duergar sharpshooters serve both as ranged support for slaver parties and
as snipers posted on towers overlooking quarries and other areas where
enslaved workers toil away the hours. Duergar sharpshooters also specialize
in nonlethal methods of ranged combat-tactics they are often called upon to
use when quelling slave riots or capturing escaped slaves.
DUERGAR SHARPSHOOTER CREATURE 0
LE MEDIUM DUERGAR DWARF HUMANOID
Perception +4; darkvision
Languages Common, Dwarven, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +3, Stealth +5
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –2
Items chain shirt, crossbow (3 bola bolts and 10 bolts), light mace
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +7, Will +4; +2 status to saves vs. magic
HP 16
Light Blindness
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] light mace +5 (agile, finesse, shove), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] crossbow +7 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8
piercing or bola bolt
Occult Innate Spells DC 12; 2nd enlarge (self only), invisibility (self only)
Bola Bolt This shot deals no damage, but on a hit, the target must succeed at a
DC 16 Reflex save or be knocked prone and immobilized until it is freed with a
successful DC 15 check to Escape. This check can be attempted either by the
target or a creature adjacent to the target.
Duergar Bombardier
Alchemy intrigues many duergars, and their cruel traditions often
motivate them to experiment on slaves. Eager to inflict pain
and justify the abuse as a method of expanding knowledge,
duergar bombardiers often accompany slaver bands so they can have the first
chance to select their next test subjects from captured victims. To duergar
bombardiers, the lob of each bomb represents a new opportunity to observe
how their targets react and record the results to enhance future modifications
to their alchemical concoctions. 
D
139

138
DUERGAR COMMUNITIES
Duergar communities are found
deep underground in the ruins
of abandoned dwarven cities.
Generations of duergar occupation
have resulted in the loss of
dwarven history as the ashen
honor their taskmaster deity by
reworking traditional dwarven art
into topics that elevate the exiled
god. That duergars themselves
seem incapable of achieving
the heights of artistry mastered
by their dwarven ancestors is
both a source of frustration and
shame that only fosters greater
resentment of those who dwell on
the surface.
DUERGAR BOMBARDIER CREATURE 1
LE MEDIUM DUERGAR DWARF HUMANOID
Perception +4; darkvision
Languages Common, Dwarven, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +6, Crafting +6, Occultism +6, Stealth +6, Survival +4
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +3, Wis +1, Cha –1
Items alchemist’s tools, infused lesser acid flask (2), infused lesser alchemist’s fire (2),
infused reagents (2), studded leather, warhammer
Infused Items A duergar bombardier’s items listed as infused last for 24 hours, or until
the next time they make their daily preparations.
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +4; +2 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 20
Light Blindness
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] warhammer +4 (shove), Damage 1d8+1 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] bomb +8 (range increment 30 feet, splash), Damage varies by bomb
Occult Innate Spells DC 17; 2nd enlarge (self only), invisibility (self only)
Alchemical Formulas (1st) lesser acid flask, lesser alchemist fire, lesser tanglefoot bag
Far Lobber The duergar bombardier has a range increment of 30 feet with their bombs
instead of 20 feet.
Quick Alchemy [one-action] The duergar bombardier creates a single alchemical item from their
formula book (see Alchemical Formulas). This item has the infused trait, but it remains
potent only until the start of the duergar bombardier’s next turn.
Quick Bomber [one-action] The duergar can use Interact to draw a bomb, then Strike with it.
Duergar Taskmaster
Duergar priests of the taskmaster god Droskar often assume leadership roles
within their communities, advancing the goals of their deity through coercion
and displays of force. Often referred to as duergar taskmasters, these leaders
often issue commands to duergar subordinates and slaves in the same
breath, treating the two almost as if they were interchangeable. As a
result, duergar taskmasters are loathed by both slave and slaver alike.
DUERGAR TASKMASTER CREATURE 2
LE MEDIUM DUERGAR DWARF HUMANOID
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Common, Dwarven, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +7, Deception +7, Intimidation +7, Occultism +5, Religion +6,
Survival +6
Str +2, Dex +0, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items chain mail, maul, religious symbol
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +4, Will +8; +2 status to all saves vs. magic, iron mind
HP 30
Iron Mind Duergar taskmasters automatically disbelieve all illusions
of 1st level or lower.
Light Blindness
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] maul +8 (shove), Damage 1d12+2 bludgeoning
Divine Prepared Spells DC 18; 1st fear, harm, magic weapon, Cantrips (1st)
detect magic, shield
Occult Innate Spells DC 18; 2nd enlarge (self only), invisibility (self only)
Take Them Down! [one-action] The duergar taskmaster smashes their maul into
the ground and invokes Droskar’s name to rally their allies to action.
All allied duergars of equal or lower level that are within
20 feet of the duergar taskmaster gain a +1 status bonus
to attack rolls and damage rolls until the end of the duergar
taskmaster’s next turn.
E-G
141

140
Dullahan
Riding on a horse as black as night, the headless hunter known as the dullahan
tracks down and takes the heads of those it deems unfit to continue living. When
closing in for the kill, the dullahan first whispers its victim’s name, then swiftly
collects its prize, casting a pall of dread upon all who witness the grim execution.
A dullahan manifests when a particularly violent warrior is beheaded and
the warrior’s soul stubbornly clings to material existence (or is refused entry
to the afterlife). Most dullahans return to their former homelands, where
they can exact vengeance those they feel wronged them in life (or their living
descendants). A dullahan’s concept of justice is swift and merciless, and once it
has selected a target, it is unwavering in its cause.
Perhaps even more than revenge on the living, a dullahan desires its own rotted
head. An individual who wields the head of a dullahan is powerful indeed, for a
dullahan will grudgingly serve such a master in the hopes of reclaiming its missing
skull. Mighty fiends such as devils command dullahans to harvest souls or lead
armies for them, while a mortal might use such an undead warrior to fulfill a
personal vendetta. No matter its master’s rank or station, however, a dullahan won’t
hesitate to kill its liege and reclaim its head when the opportunity presents itself.
Most dullahan lairs are abandoned, overgrown ruins or other dilapidated
places where severed heads and other trophies line the walls. Some dullahans,
on the other hand, are content to simply commit their foul deeds and leave the
remains of their decapitated victims in the streets, strewn among a copse of dead
trees, or unceremoniously tossed in a bog hole.
DULLAHAN CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON LE MEDIUM UNDEAD
Perception +14; lifesense 60 feet
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Athletics +15, Intimidation +17, Stealth +13, Survival +15
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +4
Items full plate, +1 hatchet, +1 longsword
AC 28; Fort +13, Ref +15, Will +17
HP 95, fast healing 5; Immunities fear, death effects, disease,
poison, paralyzed, unconscious; Weaknesses good 5
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental)
30 feet, DC 23
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] keen longsword +18 (magical,
versatile P), Damage 1d8+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] keen returning hatchet +17 (agile, sweep),
Damage 1d6+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +18 (agile, nonlethal), Damage
1d4+10 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] keen returning hatchet +14 (agile,
thrown 10 feet), Damage 2d8+10 slashing
Head Hunter Any slashing weapon a dullahan
wields becomes keen, and any hatchet it wields
becomes returning. If the dullahan kills a creature with a critical hit using a slashing
weapon, the target is decapitated as though the dullahan had used Reap on the target.
These effects remain only while the dullahan holds the weapon.
Reap [two-actions] The dullahan removes the head of a dead creature within reach. Each creature
within the area of the dullahan’s frightful presence must attempt a new save, even if
they are temporarily immune.
Summon Steed [two-actions] (conjuration, occult) The dullahan summons a warhorse (page 209)
with elite adjustments (page 6) and the fiend trait. This steed remains until it is
slain, the dullahan Dismisses it, or the dullahan summons another steed.
DULLAHAN LEGENDS
In Ustalav, residents recite legends
of a cadre of dullahans who
drive the “Coach of the Silent,” a
macabre funeral carriage pulled
by a team of spectral horses. To
the west, among the Lands of the
Linnorm Kings, Ulfen warriors
whisper of dullahans who hunt
down their victims using packs of
hellish ebony hounds. And along
the western coasts of Garund,
pirates and merchants alike insist
of the existence of a black-sailed
ship crewed entirely by headless
undead sailors.
E-G
141

140
ALLIES IN THE SKIES
Aeries of giant eagles can make
potent allies to those who respect
their territories and approach
without malice in their hearts.
Giant eagles are just as likely to
swoop in and provide unsolicited
aid to those in the lowlands
of their realm against obvious
dangers, but if not offered respect
in turn, giant eagles may abandon
an unpleasant victim to its fate
rather than suffer more insults.
Eagle
Few avian creatures can match the beauty and grace of the eagle.
Eagle
These large birds of prey swoop down from incredible heights to snatch fish and
small mammals in their powerful talons. Eagles nest atop high trees or steep cliffs
that provide a commanding view of the surrounding area. They avoid nesting too
near civilization, but some remote cultures train eagles as hunting companions.
EAGLE CREATURE –1
N SMALL ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +6
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 16; Fort +4, Ref +6, Will +2
HP 6
Speed 10 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +6 (finesse), Damage 1d6 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +6 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4 slashing
Eagle Dive [two-actions] The eagle Flies up to double its fly Speed in a straight line, descending at
least 10 feet, and then makes a talon Strike.
Giant Eagle
No mere animals, giant eagles have a keen intellect and a strong sense of
honor. As guardians of their mountain homes, giant eagles attempt to prevent
the encroachment of civilization upon wild land and the predations of wicked
humanoid settlements. Unlike ordinary eagles, which tend to be solitary creatures,
giant eagles congregate within aeries holding up to a dozen members and work
together to protect their domains.
Giant eagles have wingspans up to 30 feet across and weigh up to 500 pounds.
These impressive birds cannot be easily broken or cowed. A giant eagle may allow
trusted terrestrial friends to ride it, but they invariably resist saddles, harnesses, or
other equipment that might suggest they are mere
beasts of burden rather than trusted companions.
Giant eagles are long-lived and take debts and
oaths very seriously, often remembering slights for
years and remaining slow to forgive.
GIANT EAGLE CREATURE 3
NG LARGE BEAST
Perception +11; low-light vision
Languages Auran, Sylvan (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +8
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 19; Fort +6, Ref +11, Will +9
HP 45
Evasion When a giant eagle rolls a success on a Reflex save, it
gets a critical success instead.
Speed 10 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +12, Damage 2d8+5 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +12 (agile), Damage 1d10+5 slashing plus Grab
Eagle Dive [two-actions] The giant eagle Flies up to double its fly Speed
in a straight line, descending at least 10 feet, and then makes
a talon Strike.
Snatch A giant eagle can Fly at half Speed while it has a
creature grabbed or restrained in its talons, carrying that
creature along with it. 
E-G
143

142
Eel
Although these long, narrow fish share similarities in appearance, eels are a
diverse group of creatures.
Electric Eel
Usually found in freshwater rivers and lakes, an electric eel is not particularly
aggressive, but its ability to stun predators and prey alike can be dangerous to
larger creatures searching for their next meals.
ELECTRIC EEL CREATURE 1
N SMALL ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +4; low-light vision
Skills Athletics +6, Stealth +7
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 18; Resistances electricity 7
Speed 5 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +6, Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action]tail +6 (agile), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning plus 1d4 electricity and stunning shock
Stunning Shock (incapacitation) A creature critically hit by the electric eel’s tail must
attempt a DC 17 Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is stunned 1.
Failure The creature is stunned 2.
Critical Failure The creature is stunned 3.
Giant Moray Eel
Giant moray eels dwell in warm, tropical waters and build
lairs in narrow, twisting caves made of coral. Their size,
speed, and powerful bite make them dangerous to
divers and fishermen. Giant moray eels have rubbery
hides that secrete a layer of mucus, making them
difficult to harm with some weapons.
GIANT MORAY EEL CREATURE 5
N LARGE ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +11; low-light vision, scent (imprecise)
30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +13, Stealth +13
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 21; Fort +14, Ref +13, Will +9
HP 65; Resistances bludgeoning 5, piercing 5
Ambush [reaction] Trigger A target creature passes within
20 feet of the giant moray eel’s hiding place and has
not detected the giant moray eel. Effect The giant
moray eel lunges out of its hiding place, Swims directly
toward the triggering creature, and makes a jaws Strike
against it. The target creature is flat-footed to this attack.
Speed 10 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +15 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+8 piercing plus Grab
Pharyngeal Jaws [two-actions] Requirements The giant moray eel has a creature
grabbed in its jaws. Effect The giant moray eel uses its second set of jaws to
pull the prey into its gullet. The eel deals 1d6+4 piercing damage to the grabbed
creature and gains a +2 circumstance bonus to its Swallow Whole attempts and to
the DC for the creature to Escape. This effect ends if the target Escapes or the giant
moray eel Swallows it Whole.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Small, 1d6+6 bludgeoning, Rupture 12
EEL RESOURCES
Hide harvested from electric eels
can be used to create armor or
items that provide protection
from electricity. 
E-G
143

142
Elananx
These strange, fey felines resemble large, broad bobcats from a distance, but a closer
view reveals something amiss. Their forms ripple and billow with heat, and their
eyes glow from within as if they contain tiny, flickering flames. The pungent scent
of rotting leaves smoldering in a bonfire clings to their fur. Yet those who have the
chance to watch elananxes hunt or attack prey witness the greatest indication that
these creatures are something more than mere predators, for they act with cruel and
savvy instincts, reveling in the pain they inflict.
Elananxes typically hunt alone, but sometimes these cunning and malicious
hunters of the First World roam in packs called “billows” to take down large prey.
Like many house cats, elananxes are not content to merely track and devour prey,
but prefer to toy with their victims, drawing joy and excitement from the fear and
pain of those they capture. To this end, elananxes rarely use their cinder dispersal
ability to evade their targets, instead opting to foil their quarry just before the end
of the hunt-though, as selfish creatures who wish to live to hunt again, elananxes
often reserve one use of this ability, just in case.
Because of their clever and malicious ways, elananxes are favored as hunting
companions by redcaps (page 278), who go out of their way to befriend or make
deals with these creatures. Redcaps also find great sport in hunts where competing
elananxes chase a single creature. Although they’re large enough to serve as mounts
for redcaps, elananxes despise being ridden and resist such attempts-little is as sure
to cause a supposedly friendly elananx to turn on its redcap ally than a foolhardy
attempt to treat the fey cat as a horse!
Elananxes have a strange affinity to forest fires. Because they are immune to
the damage caused by flickering flames, they enjoy capering and caterwauling
through the smoky, burning ruins of forest infernos. Some have even been known
to use their burning bites to deliberately light undergrowth on fire, simply so they
might experience the beauty of the flames combined with the inevitable pain such
disasters inflict on other creatures.
ELANANX CREATURE 6
NE MEDIUM FEY FIRE
Perception +14; darkvision
Languages Sylvan (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +14, Survival +14 (+17 to Track)
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –3, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 24; Fort +12, Ref +16, Will +12
HP 95; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold iron 5
Cinder Dispersal [reaction] (fire, primal, transmutation); Frequency
once per day. Trigger The elananx takes damage from
a hostile source. Effect The elananx disperses into a
cloud of smoke and cinders, filling its space and a 20-
foot emanation. While in this form, the elananx can’t
be attacked or targeted, and it doesn’t take up space.
Anything inside this cloud is concealed, and any creature
ending its turn there takes 2d6 fire damage. At the start of
its turn, the elananx returns to its normal form in any square
the cloud covered. If the elananx Strikes a creature using its
first action after returning to its normal form, the target is flatfooted and the Strike deals an extra 1d6 fire damage.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +16 (magical), Damage 2d6+8 piercing and 1d6 fire
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile), Damage 2d6+8 slashing
Pack Attack The elananx’s Strikes deal an extra 1d6 damage to creatures
within the reach of at least two of its allies.
Pounce [one-action] The elananx Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement. If
the elananx began this action hidden, it remains hidden until after the attack.
ELANANX LOCATIONS
Although many elananxes dwell
in the strange realm of the First
World, some are also natives of the
Material Plane. Elananxes prefer
to dwell in regions where there
are ample intelligent creatures
to chase, hunt, and eat, and they
favor woodlands and hills as their
primary hunting grounds.
E-G
145

144
Elemental, Air
Hailing from the Plane of Air, these beings appear in a variety of sizes and shapes.
Zephyr Hawk
Zephyr hawks drift among the currents of the Plane of Air in great flocks.
ZEPHYR HAWK CREATURE 3
N SMALL AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +7; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +13, Stealth +11
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +0, Cha +0
AC 21; Fort +6, Ref +13, Will +7
HP 36; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Speed fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] wing +11 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d8+4 slashing
Circling Attack [two-actions] The zephyr hawk Flies up to half its Speed, makes two wing
Strikes, then Flies up to half its Speed again to return to its original location. The
second half of this movement doesn’t trigger reactions. Both attacks count toward
the zephyr hawk’s multiple attack penalty, but the penalty doesn’t increase until
after it makes both attacks.
Living Whirlwind
A living whirlwind resembles a roughly humanoid-shaped dust devil.
LIVING WHIRLWIND CREATURE 5
N MEDIUM AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +16, Stealth +14
Str +3, Dex +5, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +1, Cha +0
AC 24; Fort +9, Ref +16, Will +10
HP 50; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Disperse [reaction] Trigger The living whirlwind takes damage from a hostile action.
Effect The living whirlwind disperses. Until the end of the current turn, it can’t
be attacked or targeted, doesn’t take up space, and any auras or emanations it has are
suppressed. At the end of the turn, the living whirlwind reforms in any space in
which it can fit within 25 feet of where it dispersed and any auras or emanations it
has are restored as long as their duration didn’t run out while it was dispersed.
Speed fly 50 feet; swiftness
Melee [one-action] gust +14 (finesse, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+7 bludgeoning plus Push
5 feet
Swiftness The living whirlwind’s movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
Invisible Stalker
Invisible stalkers have a poor opinion of mortals due to the
unsavory nature of the violent tasks summoners usually call
them to the Material Plane to perform.
INVISIBLE STALKER CREATURE 7
N MEDIUM AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +16, Stealth +18, Survival +15
(+19 to Track)
Str +3, Dex +6, Con +3, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 26; Fort +14, Ref +18, Will +11
HP 70; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
ELEMENTAL BEINGS
The Elemental Planes-primordial
realms defined by aspects of air,
earth, fire, or water-are home to
a diverse group of beings known
as elementals. Spellcasters on
the Material Plane call upon
elementals for aid, though these
enigmatic creatures can also
travel to the world of mortals via
interplanar gateways and rifts.
The elementals on these pages
exemplify the creatures of the
Elemental Planes, but this list is by
no means exhaustive.
E-G
145

144
PRIMAL ELEMENTALS
The most well known of all
elementals are the primal
elementals, creatures composed
entirely of air, earth, fire, or water
with roughly humanoid shapes.
Many primal elementals are
named after natural disasters,
ranging from those relatively
small in scale (and roughly the
size of Medium humanoids) to
much larger ones (often the
size of small buildings). Primal
elementals can often be found
in areas where their namesake
disasters have recently struck.
Naturally Invisible The invisible stalker is invisible at all times, though when it takes
a hostile action of any kind, it is hidden instead of undetected until the start of its
next turn, as the vague outline of its humanoid form is faintly visible for a short
period of time.
Speed 25 feet, fly 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +18 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d10+5 bludgeoning
Sneak Attack The invisible stalker deals 2d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.
Swift Tracker The invisible stalker moves at full Speed while Tracking.
Storm Lord
Storm lords wage battles to claim important territory within the Plane of Air.
STORM LORD CREATURE 9
N LARGE AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +20, Stealth +18
Str +4, Dex +7, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 30; Fort +15, Ref +20, Will +16
HP 120; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
High Winds (air, aura) 20 feet. Air within the emanation is difficult terrain for Flying
creatures that do not have the air trait.
Disperse [reaction] As living whirlwind, but the storm lord reforms within 50 feet.
Speed fly 75 feet; swiftness
Melee [one-action] gust +20 (finesse, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+10 bludgeoning plus Push
5 feet
Ranged [one-action] lightning lash +20 (range increment 50 feet), Damage 2d12+4 electricity
Swiftness The storm lord’s movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
Elemental Hurricane
Elemental hurricanes embody the ferocity of violent windstorms.
ELEMENTAL HURRICANE CREATURE 11
N HUGE AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +20; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +24, Stealth +22
Str +6, Dex +7, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 32; Fort +19, Ref +24, Will +18
HP 140; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
High Winds (air, aura) 40 feet. As storm lord.
Disperse [reaction] As living whirlwind, but the elemental hurricane reforms within 100 feet.
Speed fly 100 feet; swiftness
Melee [one-action] gust +24 (finesse, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d10+12 bludgeoning plus Push
10 feet
Ranged [one-action] lightning lash +24 (range increment 75 feet), Damage 2d12+6 electricity
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (air) The elemental breathes a 30-foot cone of air. Creatures in
the cone must succeed at a DC 29 Fortitude save or be knocked away from the
elemental. A creature knocked into a solid object stops moving and takes 10d6
bludgeoning damage. The elemental hurricane can’t use Breath Weapon again for
1d4 rounds.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is Pushed 20 feet.
Failure The creature is Pushed 40 feet.
Critical Failure The creature is Pushed 40 feet and knocked prone.
Swiftness The elemental’s movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
E-G
147

146
ELEMENTAL LORDS
The most powerful elementals are
demigods known as elemental
lords. Until recently, only four evil
elemental lords ruled over realms
on the Elemental Planes. However,
recent events have allowed the
previously imprisoned good
elemental lords to return to their
realms, causing massive conflicts
that could lead to planar wars.
Elemental, Earth
Earth elementals make excellent bodyguards for adventuresome spelunkers and are
ideal protectors of important subterranean locations such as vaults and treasuries.
Sod Hound
Sod hounds are mossy extraplanar canines formed of packed dirt and pebbles.
SOD HOUND CREATURE 3
N SMALL EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +9; crystal sense (imprecise) 60 feet, darkvision
Skills Athletics +11, Survival +9 (+11 to Track)
Str +4, Dex –1, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
Crystal Sense A sod hound can sense crystals or gems within 60 feet as if using the
scent ability.
AC 19; Fort +12, Ref +6, Will +7
HP 44; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Speed 30 feet, burrow 20 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d10+6 piercing plus Knockdown
Earth Glide The sod hound can Burrow through any earthen
matter, including rock. When it does so, the sod hound moves at
its full burrow Speed, leaving no tunnels or signs of its passing.
Living Landslide
Living landslides resemble humanoids made of earth
and gravel.
LIVING LANDSLIDE CREATURE 5
N MEDIUM EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +12; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Terran
Skills Athletics +14, Stealth +8
Str +5, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +1, Cha –1
Earthbound When not touching solid ground, the living landslide is
slowed 1 and can’t use reactions.
AC 21; Fort +15, Ref +8, Will +10
HP 90; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Crumble [reaction] Trigger The living landslide takes damage from a hostile
source while atop rock or earth. Effect The living landslide crumbles into
the ground, Burrowing down 10 feet. This Burrowing does not trigger
reactions. The living landslide can’t Crumble again for 1d4 rounds.
Speed 25 feet, burrow 25 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action] fist +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+8 bludgeoning
Earth Glide As sod hound.
Xorn
These squat, rotund elementals have three legs, three arms,
three eyes, and one massive maw, which they fill with the gems
and metals they find so delicious.
XORN CREATURE 7
N MEDIUM EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +15; darkvision, tremorsense
(imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Terran
Skills Athletics +17, Geology Lore +15,
Stealth +11, Survival +15
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +5, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
E-G
147

146
ELEMENTAL CREATURES
Not all elementals are lumbering,
humanoid-shaped creatures. Some
take on the forms and natures
of animals and beasts from the
Material Plane. These creatures
often behave in ways similar to
their Material Plane counterparts,
even though as elementals they
lack the animalistic instincts
mortal creatures have when it
comes to hunting, reproducing,
and the like. Elemental creatures
are favorites of conjurers due to
their small size, relative ease of
summoning, and varied abilities.
AC 25, all-around vision; Fort +18, Ref +11, Will +13
HP 115; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances cold 5, electricity 5,
fire 5; Weaknesses bludgeoning 5
Speed 20 feet, burrow 20 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action] jaw +18 (deadly 1d10), Damage 2d10+8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +18 (agile), Damage 2d6+8 slashing
Claw Frenzy [two-actions] The xorn makes three claw Strikes; no more than two can be against
the same target. These attacks count toward the xorn’s multiple attack penalty, but
the penalty doesn’t increase until after all the attacks have been made.
Earth Glide As sod hound.
Stone Mauler
These towering heaps of earth can inflict tremendous damage up close and from afar.
STONE MAULER CREATURE 9
N LARGE EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +16; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 80 feet
Languages Terran
Skills Athletics +21, Stealth +12
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +7, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha –1
Earthbound When not touching solid ground, a stone mauler is slowed 1 and can’t
use reactions.
AC 27; Fort +23, Ref +15, Will +19
HP 180; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Spike Stones (aura, earth, primal, transmutation) 5 feet. Spikes of rock rise up from all stone
surfaces in the emanation, creating difficult terrain. A creature moving in the terrain takes
2d6 piercing damage for each square of spikes it moves into (a Large or larger creature
takes damage only once for each square it moves, even if its space covers multiple squares
of spikes). Creatures with the earth trait ignore all effects within the area. The stone mauler
can disable or activate spike stones as a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
Crumble [reaction] As living landslide, but 15 feet down.
Speed 35 feet, burrow 35 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action] fist +21 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+10 bludgeoning plus Push 10 feet
Ranged [one-action] rock +21 (brutal, range increment 80 feet), Damage 2d12+6 bludgeoning
Earth Glide As sod hound.
Elemental Avalanche
Stubborn and ponderous, elemental avalanches are massive beings of living rock
and dirt.
ELEMENTAL AVALANCHE CREATURE 11
N HUGE EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +20; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 90 feet
Languages Terran
Skills Athletics +24, Stealth +14
Str +7, Dex –1, Con +8, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha –1
Earthbound When not touching solid ground, the elemental avalanche is slowed 1, can’t
use reactions, and can’t Trample.
AC 32; Fort +26, Ref +17, Will +21
HP 215; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Spike Stones (aura, earth, primal, transmutation) 10 feet. As stone mauler, but 2d8 piercing.
Crumble [reaction] As living landslide.
Speed 25 feet, burrow 25 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action] fist +24 (reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+11 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +24 (brutal, range increment 80 feet), Damage 2d12+7 bludgeoning
Earth Glide As sod hound.
Trample[three-actions] Large or smaller, fist, DC 30
E-G
149

148
ELEMENTAL VORTEXES
Where the boundary between
planes wears thin, elementals
manifest in the world through
churning vortexes. Such gateways
might lie at the heart of a volcano, a
deep ocean trench, in regions beset
with earthquakes, or within
great storms.
Elemental, Fire
Fire elementals are destructive manifestations of the scorching Plane of Fire.
Cinder Rat
These oversized rodents are made of smoldering charcoal and elemental fire, and
noxious fumes continually bellow from their flaming flesh.
CINDER RAT CREATURE 3
N SMALL ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +9; darkvision, smoke vision
Skills Acrobatics +10, Stealth +10, Survival +9
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Smoke Vision The cinder rat ignores the concealed condition from smoke.
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +6
HP 45; Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Weaknesses cold 5
Fetid Fumes (aura, fire) 5 feet. A creature that enters the aura or begins its turn there
must succeed at a DC 22 Fortitude save or become sickened 1. Everything within
the aura, including the cinder rat, is concealed by smoke.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (finesse), Damage 1d8+4 fire plus 1d4 persistent fire
Living Wildfire
Living wildfires appear as humanoids made of living fire.
LIVING WILDFIRE CREATURE 5
N MEDIUM ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +10; darkvision, smoke vision
Languages Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +13
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +3, Cha +0
Smoke Vision The living wildfire ignores the concealed condition from smoke.
AC 22; Fort +11, Ref +15, Will +10
HP 80, explosion; Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Weaknesses cold 5
Explosion (fire) When the living wildfire dies, it explodes, dealing 3d6 fire damage
to each creature in a 10-foot emanation (DC 19 basic Reflex save).
Speed 50 feet
Melee [one-action] tendril +15 (agile, finesse, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+6 fire plus
2d4 persistent fire
Ranged [one-action] fire mote +15 (range increment 60 feet), Damage 2d6+3 fire
Salamander
Salamanders have serpentine lower torsos, but humanoid upper bodies
with toothy reptilian snouts. Their affinity for cruelty and violence puts
them in close alliance with the demons of the Abyss.
SALAMANDER CREATURE 7
CE MEDIUM ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Common, Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +17, Crafting +15 (+17 for blacksmithing),
Deception +12, Intimidation +14, Society +13
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items +1 ranseur
AC 26; Fort +15, Ref +16, Will +13
HP 125; Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Weaknesses cold 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 20 feet
E-G
149

148
“CIVILIZED” ELEMENTALS
Some elementals, such as invisible
stalkers, xorns, and salamanders,
have specific cultures and
personalities that elevate them
beyond simple magical creatures
or manifestations of living
energy. These creatures are often
found in larger settlements or
living alongside genies on their
respective planes.
Melee [one-action] ranseur +18 (disarm, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+7 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +17 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+7 bludgeoning plus 1d6 fire
and Grab
Armor of Flames [one-action] The salamander stokes its internal flames. Until the start of its next
turn, it gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC, and when an adjacent creature touches it
or hits it with a physical attack, that creature takes 2d6 persistent fire damage unless
it succeeds at a DC 25 Reflex save.
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+4 bludgeoning plus 1d6 fire, DC 25
Firewyrm
Firewyrms live in tubes of molten lava found throughout the Plane of Fire.
FIREWYRM CREATURE 9
N HUGE ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +16; darkvision, smoke vision
Languages Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +20
Str +5, Dex +5, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +0
Smoke Vision The firewyrm ignores the concealed condition from smoke.
AC 28; Fort +18, Ref +20, Will +15
HP 165, explosion; Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Weaknesses cold 10
Explosion (fire) As living wildfire, but 6d6 fire and DC 28.
Intense Heat (aura, fire) 10 feet, 4d6 fire, DC 25 basic Reflex.
Speed 60 feet
Melee [one-action] tail +20 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+11 fire plus 2d8 persistent fire
Ranged [one-action] fire mote +20 (range increment 60 feet), Damage 2d8+6 fire
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The firewyrm breathes a 30-foot cone of
fire dealing 7d6 fire and 2d8 persistent fire damage to every creature within the cone
(DC 28 basic Reflex save). The firewyrm can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Elemental Inferno
Walking conflagrations of unimaginably hot fire, elemental infernos are harbingers
of destruction and heedless chaos.
ELEMENTAL INFERNO CREATURE 11
N HUGE ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +20; darkvision, smoke vision
Languages Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +21
Str +6, Dex +6, Con +5, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
Smoke Vision The elemental inferno ignores the concealed condition from smoke.
AC 31; Fort +21, Ref +23, Will +19
HP 210, explosion; Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Weaknesses cold 15
Explosion (fire) As living wildfire, but 7d6 fire damage and DC 30.
Intense Heat (aura, fire) 10 feet, 7d6 fire, DC 28 basic Reflex.
Speed 70 feet
Melee [one-action] tendril +24 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+12 fire plus 3d8 persistent fire
Ranged [one-action] fire mote +24 (range increment 60 feet), Damage 2d10+6 fire
Blue Flames When the elemental inferno scores a critical hit, its body surges with blue
flames, increasing the damage of its intense heat and Inferno Leap by 3d6 until the start
of its next turn.
Inferno Leap [two-actions] (fire) The elemental inferno jumps horizontally and vertically with a
maximum height and distance each equal to its Speed. Its intense heat is suppressed
until the end of the jump. At any point during the jump, flames explode from the
elemental in a 30-foot emanation, dealing 12d6 fire damage to each creature within
the area (DC 30 basic Reflex save). The elemental inferno can’t Inferno Leap again for
1d4 rounds.
E-G
151

150
CONJURING MEPHITS
Mephits are a favorite target for
low-level spellcasters to summon,
both because they have several
useful abilities and because they
are relatively easy to command
and manipulate. Still, care must
be taken when using mephits as
minions, because if left unwatched
or unattended for too long, they
can cause all sorts of mischief.
Elemental, Mephit
Mephits-sometimes known as elemental scamps-are little bipedal critters
with bat-like wings who serve stronger elementals on the Elemental Planes or
neophyte spellcasters who summon them to the Material Plane. All mephits
have an inkling of magical power as well as a breath weapon.
Air Mephit
Air mephits are capricious and flighty relative to their kin; they are as likely to
fly blindly into battle as they are to whine in terror at a loud noise. They are pale
blue in coloration and have thin wings that trail small puffs of vapor as they fly
through the skies.
AIR MEPHIT CREATURE 1
N SMALL AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +3; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +7, Stealth +7
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha +0
AC 16; Fort +3, Ref +19, Will +7
HP 12, fast healing 2 (in open air); Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +9 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6+1 slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 17; 2nd blur; 1st gust of wind
Breath Weapon [two-actions](air, arcane) The air mephit breathes sand and grit in a 15-foot cone
that deals 2d6 slashing damage to each creature within the area (DC 17 basic Reflex
save). The air mephit can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Earth Mephit
Earth mephits are humorless and trudge about their tasks with little enthusiasm.
They are somewhat more stout than other mephits, and their dark-brown or
gray bodies are always coated with layers of dirt and filth. An earth mephit
can fly, just as any other mephit, but the act of flight is uncomfortable and
unnerving to them-they rarely ascend higher than 5 feet off the ground if
they can help it.
EARTH MEPHIT CREATURE 1
N SMALL EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +3; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Terran
Skills Athletics +6, Stealth +2
Str +3, Dex –1, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha –1
AC 15; Fort +8, Ref +4, Will +3
HP 20, fast healing 2 (while underground); Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep
Speed 20 feet, burrow 20 feet, fly 15 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +8, Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 17; 3rd meld into stone; 2nd enlarge (self only)
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, earth) The earth mephit breathes rocks in a 15-foot cone
that deals 2d6 bludgeoning damage to each creature within the area (DC 17 basic
Reflex save). The earth mephit can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Fire Mephit
Fire mephits are conniving and quick to anger. They aren’t evil, but they delight
in inflicting pain, and their love of burning things pushes them the closest to this
alignment of all mephits. They have bright-orange skin, and wisps of flame flicker
along their wings as they flap through the air. The rivalry between fire and water
mephits is notorious, and these creatures loathe working together for any amount
of time.
E-G
151

150
OTHER MEPHITS
The four mephits presented here
are but the most common of
their kind. Others that rise from
the mixing of elemental energies
exist as well: creatures like dust
mephits (who breathe out a
scouring cloud of grit), ice mephits
(who spit out sickening gusts of
frozen air), magma mephits (which
can assume the form of a pool of
lava), ooze mephits (which spit out
foul-smelling acid), salt mephits
(who can draw moisture out of the
environs and nearby creatures),
and steam mephits (which can call
down tiny squalls of boiling rain).
FIRE MEPHIT CREATURE 1
N SMALL ELEMENTAL FIRE
Perception +3; darkvision, smoke vision
Languages Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +7, Deception +7
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha +2
Smoke Vision The fire mephit ignores the concealed condition from smoke.
AC 17; Fort +3, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 16, fast healing 2 (while touching fire); Immunities bleed, fire, paralyzed, poison,
sleep; Weaknesses cold 3
Speed 20 feet, fly 25 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +9 (finesse), Damage 1d6 piercing and 1d4 fire
Arcane Innate Spells DC 15; Cantrips (1st) daze, light
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, fire) The fire mephit breathes flames in a 15-foot cone
that deals 2d4 fire and 1d4 persistent fire damage to each creature within the
area (DC 17 basic Reflex save). The fire mephit can’t use Breath Weapon again for
1d4 rounds.
Water Mephit
Water mephits are consummate jokers who are always happy to trade a favor
for a good laugh. Just as fire mephits are the ones who cleave closest to evil
without fully crossing over into true villainy, water mephits are the friendliest
of the mephits and therefore the closest to good. Still, one should take care
in making assumptions about a water mephit’s benevolence, for no one can
reliably count on them to keep their inborn need for pranks and trickery at bay
for long. Water mephits have blue-green skin that shimmers in light like fish
scales. Though water mephits’ wings look more like webbed fins than limbs
capable of flight, they can flap their wings to fly through the air as easily as any
other mephit. Water mephits prefer to swim, when possible, and they leave the
water only when they must.
WATER MEPHIT CREATURE 1
N SMALL AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +3; darkvision
Languages Aquan
Skills Athletics +6, Stealth +6
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –2, Wis
+0, Cha +0
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +11, Will +4
HP 20, fast healing 2 (while
underwater); Immunities  bleed,
paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances
acid 3, fire 3
Speed 20 feet, fly 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +8 (finesse), Damage 1d6+1
slashing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 17, attack +9; 2nd acid
arrow
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (acid, arcane) The water mephit
breathes acid in a 15-foot cone that deals 2d6 acid
damage to each creature within the area (DC 17 basic
Reflex save). The water mephit can’t use Breath Weapon
again for 1d4 rounds.
Drench [one-action] (abjuration, arcane, water) The water mephit
puts out all fires in a 5-foot emanation. The mephit extinguishes all
non-magical fires automatically and attempts to counteract magical fires
(+7 counteract modifier).
E-G
153

152
OTHER ELEMENTALS
When energies from elemental
planes mix, unusual elemental life
can form. The combination of fire
and earth, for example, can spawn
magma elementals, while air and
water can create ice elementals.
Lightning elementals form from a
conjunction of fire and air, while
water and earth give birth to mud
elementals. It’s possible that in
the vastness of the Great Beyond,
even more unusual elementals
might exist, although they are as
rare as they are strange.
Elemental, Water
Water elementals can be very destructive, but often not intentionally so; just as
water can bring life to those in need on the Material Plane, its waves can pound
shores and rains can flood cities. Water elementals are similarly difficult to predict.
Brine Shark
Brine sharks are deadly elementals that roam the endless oceans of the Plane of Water.
BRINE SHARK CREATURE 3
N MEDIUM AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Athletics +10, Stealth +11, Survival +8
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +6
HP 45; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances fire 5
Speed 15 feet, swim 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d12+7 piercing plus Grab
Deep Plunge [one-action] The brine shark dives straight down into the water, moving up to twice its
swim Speed in a straight vertical line. It can use this ability while grabbing a creature.
Living Waterfall
Living waterfalls are humanoid-shaped columns of churning water.
LIVING WATERFALL CREATURE 5
N LARGE AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Aquan
Skills Athletics +13, Stealth +12
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –2, Wis +1, Cha +0
Water-Bound When not touching water, the
living waterfall is slowed 1 and can’t use
reactions.
AC 20; Fort +14, Ref +12, Will +10
HP 90; Immunities bleed, paralyzed,
poison, sleep; Resistances fire 5
Vortex (aura, water) 30 feet.
Water in the area that is in the
same body of water as the living
waterfall is difficult terrain for
Swimming creatures that don’t
have the water trait.
Speed 20 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] wave +15 (reach 10
feet), Damage 2d8+7 bludgeoning
plus Push or Pull 5 feet
Drench [one-action] (abjuration, primal, water)
The elemental puts out all fires in a
5-foot emanation. It extinguishes all
non-magical fires automatically and
attempts to counteract magical fires (+14
counteract modifier).
Quatoid
Quatoids are peculiar, mysterious elementals
native to the Plane of Water that resemble fourtentacled octopuses with eerily humanoid
faces on their mantles.
E-G
153

152
MONSTROUS ELEMENTALS
Some elementals are more than
living incarnations of air, earth,
fire, or water. Creatures like the
genie (pages 162–165), the uthul
(page 317), or the zaramuun (page
339) have their own complex
ecologies and societies. While
these creatures originally hail
from an Elemental Plane, they can
often be found on the Material
Plane as well.
QUATOID CREATURE 7
LN SMALL AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Aquan, Common
Skills Athletics +15, Diplomacy +12, Elemental Lore +17, Occultism +17, Society +17,
Stealth +13
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +1
AC 25; Fort +13, Ref +15, Will +18
HP 120; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances bludgeoning 5, fire 5
Calming Bioluminescence (aura, emotion, mental, visual) 30 feet. The aura sheds dim light.
Creatures in the emanation gain a +2 circumstance bonus to saving throws against
emotion effects. The quatoid can activate or deactivate its calming bioluminescence as a
single action, which has the concentrate trait.
Speed 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] tentacle +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+6 bludgeoning plus Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 27, attack +17; 2nd hydraulic push (at will)
Constrict [one-action] 1d12+6 bludgeoning, DC 25
Tidal Master
Tidal masters use their power over waves and water to drown their enemies.
TIDAL MASTER CREATURE 9
N LARGE AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Aquan
Skills Athletics +20, Stealth +19
Str +5, Dex +5, Con +5, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +0
Water-Bound As living waterfall.
AC 28; Fort +18, Ref +21, Will +15
HP 155; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances fire 10
Vortex (aura, water) 40 feet. As living waterfall.
Speed 30 feet, swim 80 feet
Melee [one-action] wave +21 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+11 bludgeoning plus Push or Pull 10 feet
Drench [one-action] (abjuration, primal, water) As living waterfall, but a 10-foot emanation and a
+20 counteract modifier.
Elemental Tsunami
Elemental tsunamis are huge and destructive.
ELEMENTAL TSUNAMI CREATURE 11
N HUGE AQUATIC ELEMENTAL WATER
Perception +22; darkvision
Languages Aquan
Skills Athletics +23, Stealth +23
Str +6, Dex +6, Con +6, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
Water-Bound As living waterfall.
AC 31; Fort +21, Ref +22, Will +19
HP 195; Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep; Resistances fire 10
Vortex (aura, water) 50 feet. As living waterfall.
Speed 35 feet, swim 100 feet
Melee wave +24 [one-action] (reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+12 bludgeoning plus Push or Pull 10 feet
Drench [one-action] (abjuration, primal, water) As living waterfall, but a 20-foot emanation and a
+20 counteract modifier.
Surge [two-actions] The elemental tsunami quickly expands its space to fill the area of its vortex.
Creatures within the vortex’s emanation take 5d12+6 bludgeoning damage (DC 31 basic
Fortitude save). A creature that fails this save is Pushed 20 feet. The elemental tsunami
then retracts to its former space. The elemental tsunami can’t Surge again for 1d4 rounds.
E-G
155

154
ELEPHANT RESOURCES
Elephant tusks are a highly soughtafter treasure, the ivory from a
single tusk potentially fetching
hundreds of gold coins. Those
who value the elephant’s majestic
presence are impassioned defenders
of the creatures, making the
hunt for ivory dangerous.
Elephant
Immediately recognizable by their long, prehensile trunks and impressive tusks,
elephants have different characteristics depending on where they are found.
Elephants are used as beasts of burden in many regions, but they are extremely
clever and must be handled with great care.
Elephant
Those who live near elephants have learned to be wary of angering the beasts,
but even with precautions in place, elephants sometimes still rampage. There
is little an individual person can do when even a single elephant becomes
enraged. Furthermore, a herd of angry or frightened elephants can easily
destroy an entire village.
ELEPHANT CREATURE 7
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +13; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +17, Survival +15
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 23; Fort +18, Ref +11, Will +13
HP 130
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] tusk +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+9 piercing
Melee [one-action] trunk +18 (reach 15 feet), Effect grabbing trunk
Melee [one-action] foot +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+9 bludgeoning
Grabbing Trunk A Medium or smaller creature hit by the elephant’s
trunk is grabbed. If the elephant moves, it can bring the grabbed
creature along with it.
Trample[three-actions] Large or smaller, foot, DC 24
Mammoth
Found mostly in colder climates, mammoths are accustomed to
dealing with desperate and dangerous predators, trampling
and crushing their enemies while using their larger tusks
to greater effect. Humanoids dwelling in harsh,
frost-bound lands rely on the mammoth’s strength
to help them survive.
MAMMOTH CREATURE 10
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +18; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +22, Survival +19
Str +8, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 29; Fort +21, Ref +15, Will +18; +2 status to all saves vs. cold
HP 190
Cold Adaptation The mammoth reduces the effects it suffers
from cold environments by one step.
Speed 45 feet
Melee [one-action] tusk +22 (reach 15 feet), Damage 3d8+12 piercing
Melee [one-action] trunk +22 (reach 15 feet), Effect grabbing trunk
Melee [one-action] foot +22 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+12
bludgeoning
Dual Tusks [one-action] The mammoth makes two tusk Strikes,
each against a different creature. This counts as one
attack for the mammoth’s multiple attack penalty, and
the penalty doesn’t increase until after both attacks.
Grabbing Trunk As elephant.
Trample [three-actions] Large or smaller, foot, DC 28
E-G
155

154
ETHER SPIDER FOES
The Ethereal Plane is a sparsely
populated realm in comparison
to most, used more for traveling
than dwelling. Yet the deep mists
here conceal denizens such as
monstrous parasitic beings that
use humanoids as incubators for
eggs and fiends born from the
raw fears of mortal life, and ether
spiders are ever vigilant against
those foes’ machinations.
Ether Spider
Ether spiders are deadly predators from the Ethereal Plane resembling giant
arachnids. Rather than building webs of silk, ether spiders shape the raw
essence of the Ethereal Plane, weaving it in complex patterns that drift through
the misty void. From these ethereal nests, whole families of ether spiders can
scout the adjacent Material Plane, watching for easy prey in dark or remote
corners of the land of mortals. Once an ether spider has spotted a meal, it
anchors its nest and waits on the Ethereal Plane for its prey to draw near. As
soon as its victim is within reach, the ether spider shifts to the Material Plane,
clamps its fangs onto its prey, then shifts back to the Ethereal Plane to wait as
its venom works through the creature’s system. Ether spiders move between
the planes with ease, making them extremely dangerous to those who cannot
see or attack ethereal enemies.
Ether spiders are not mindless or evil-they are simply hungry. If a prospective
meal can sate an ether spider’s incredible appetite through other means, they
might be able to bargain for their life. Ether spiders are especially interested in
items, information, or allies who can help them against their enemies.
As many as half a dozen ether spiders might dwell in the same ether web.
Although ether spiders enjoy one another’s company, they don’t form the same
bonds as most humanoids, and they are more likely to feast on the
corpse of a fallen sibling than save one from certain doom.
Ether spiders dwell in vast nests adrift in the Ghost World,
where they are more likely to let down their guard. Travelers who
find a floating ether spider commune should have an easier time of
making peaceful contact to trade with or even befriend these strange
arachnids. The nests drift on metaphysical currents and are rarely
seen in the same vicinity twice. Sometimes a point of interest on the
neighboring Material Plane compels them to tether their nest to an area,
creating a semipermanent home, and those who learn its location can
return to it repeatedly.
ETHER SPIDER CREATURE 5
N LARGE BEAST ETHEREAL
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Aklo
Skills Athletics +12, Stealth +15
Str +5, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –2, Wis +1, Cha +7
AC 21; Fort +12, Ref +15, Will +10
HP 75
Speed 40 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +15 (magical), Damage 1d10+7 piercing plus ether spider venom and Grab
Ranged [one-action] web +14 (magical, range increment 30 feet); Effect ethereal web trap
Ether Spider Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude; Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and clumsy 1 (1 round); Stage 2 2d6 poison
damage, clumsy 2 and slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 3 3d6 poison damage, clumsy 3 and
slowed 2 (1 round)
Ethereal Step [one-action] The ether spider shifts to either the Ethereal Plane or the Material
Plane. The ether spider can remain on the Ethereal Plane indefinitely without ill
effect. While there, it can see clearly onto the Material Plane with a range of 60
feet. On its first round in an encounter, the ether spider can use this ability once as
a free action.
Ethereal Web Trap A creature hit by the ether spider’s web attack is immobilized and
stuck to the nearest surface (Escape DC 22).
Web Burst [two-actions] Frequency once per day; Effect The ether spider flings a gout of stored
webs in a 30-foot cone. These webs can pass between the Material Plane and the
Ethereal Plane. Each creature in the area is immobilized, as ethereal web trap, unless
it succeeds at a DC 22 Reflex save.
E-G
157

156
LOSING A HEAD
An ettin who loses one of its heads
is a sorry sight indeed. Rather than
clean and cauterize the stump, an
ettin will typically leave as much
of its decapitated head attached as
possible, even possibly attempting
to sew a completely severed head
back on or keep it in a knapsack
strung around its shoulder.
Ettin
Two heads aren’t always better than one. The slovenly, violent giants known as
ettins are proof enough of that.
The origin of these two-headed brutes is unknown, but few who encounter
ettins ponder their beginnings for long. Rather, the first priority for most creatures
during such a confrontation is escape, which is not easy to accomplish given the
ettins’ notorious vigilance. In this way, two heads are better than one-ettins
regularly find employ in the ranks of giant or orc armies as sentries and guards.
The benefits of an ettin security detail are obvious: because it has a shared
stomach, an ettin requires only the same amount of food as one typical ogre,
yet its two sets of eyes make it twice as observant. An ettin never complains for
lack of company, either. The ettin’s two heads are uniquely content to squabble
and converse between themselves, and though they bicker incessantly, most
couldn’t dream of life without the other. Much like some twins, an ettin has
two individual minds who nonetheless consider the other as much a part of
their life as their own self.
Ettins do not resemble a single giant heritage so much as an amalgamation
of several. Their tusks are thought to stem from orc ancestry, though their size
and dimness suggest hill giant blood. Though they tower over goblins
and hobgoblins, ettins are more than at home among tribes of these
creatures and enjoy their comfortable stations as camp lookouts
or troop rearguards. Their exposure to a wide variety of
goblinoids and giants is evident in their language; ettins
speak a pidgin tongue of Goblin, Jotun, and Orcish,
and their diction is mostly good enough to get across
the general meaning of their short sentences and
bumbled sayings-although most interlocutors
simply nod their heads while conversing
with an ettin anyway. The monsters are
notoriously short tempered and, despite their
heightened visual perception, short sighted in
matters of keeping their allies alive.
ETTIN CREATURE 6
CE LARGE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +16; low-light vision
Languages pidgin of Goblin, Jotun, and Orcish
Skills Athletics +16, Intimidation +10
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha +0
Independent Brains Each of an ettin’s heads rolls its own
initiative and has its own turn. Neither head can Delay. At
the start of a head’s turn, that head gets 2 actions and 1
reaction. Each brain controls one of the ettin’s arms, but
both can move the legs. Any ability that would sever
an ettin’s head (such as the vorpal weapon property)
doesn’t cause the ettin to die if it still has its other
head, but does cause it to lose the turns, actions,
and reactions of the severed head. Mental effects
that target a single creature affect only one of
the ettin’s heads.
Items flail (2)
AC 21; Fort +16, Ref +11, Will +12
HP 110
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] flail +16 (disarm, reach 10 feet, sweep, trip), Damage 2d6+10 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] fist +16 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d6+10 bludgeoning
E-G
157

156
FAERIE DRAGON
TREASURE
Faerie dragon hide can be made
into armor for a Small creature.
They sometimes wear magical
amulets or rings.
FAERIE DRAGON LAIRS
Faerie dragons live in old forests or
places where the veil between the
First World and the Material Plane
is thinnest. They often decorate
their lairs with sparkly trinkets or
groom the surrounding foliage into
pleasing shapes.
Faerie Dragon
Although they are much smaller than their larger dragon cousins, faerie dragons
have the many of the same physiological attributes, including long necks, toothy
maws, sinuous tails, and sharp claws. They flit about on iridescent butterfly wings,
the coloring of which changes based on where they live, giving them a natural
camouflage. Unlike their larger kin, an adult faerie dragon remains the same size
throughout its lifespan. The only visual clue to the age of a faerie dragon is the
sheen on its scales, a glimmer that becomes more lustrous the older it gets.
Faerie dragons usually exhibit pleasant and good-natured temperaments,
though they have a mischievous streak that leads them to play tricks on those
around them. In search of an amusement, they prefer harmless annoyances to
wounding malice. While often spontaneous, they may also spend months if not
years planning the perfect prank. Especially responsive targets endear themselves
to faerie dragons and may create a lifelong bond. A faerie dragon’s reputation as
a trickster leads many to associate them with fey, with whom the tiny dragons
have cordial relationships.
Peaceful by nature, faerie dragons do not enjoy confrontation. If faced with
hostility, they prefer to remain at a distance and breathe euphoric gas at their foes,
diffusing the skirmish by creating an atmosphere of bliss. If conflict escalates,
they target their opponents with spells, using their renowned trickery to escape.
If their companions are in danger, however, their desire to remain out of combat
changes. Faerie dragons protect their friends by any means available, including
physical combat.
Sometimes as faerie dragons grow older, their connection to the First World
grows stronger. In addition to growing more lustrous and vibrant in appearance,
these faerie dragons gain an increasing amount of magical primal power. Such
faerie dragons increase in strength as appropriate-a faerie dragon of
20th level or even higher is possible, but it is exceptionally unusual
to encounter a faerie dragon of 9th level or higher beyond the
most remote regions of the First World. When creating a more
powerful faerie dragon, change its tradition to primal and
grant it a number of primal spells known appropriate
for a druid of its level. Faerie dragons don’t grow
much larger, regardless of how powerful they
become. Those who would seek to torment or vex
a faerie dragon would do well to consider this, as
it’s often difficult to tell how powerful one of these
tiny dragons truly is at a simple glance!
FAERIE DRAGON CREATURE 2
UNCOMMON CG TINY DRAGON
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Common, Draconic, Sylvan; telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Deception +8, Diplomacy +8, Nature +4, Stealth +10
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +0, Cha +2
AC 18; Fort +5, Ref +12, Will +11
HP 30; Immunities paralyzed, sleep
Speed 15 feet, fly 40 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (magical, finesse), Damage 1d4 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 21; 4th invisibility (self only)
Arcane Spontaneous Spells DC 18, attack +10; 1st (4 slots) grease, illusory object,
sleep; Cantrips (1st) dancing lights, ghost sound, prestidigitation, tanglefoot,
telekinetic projectile
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, evocation, poison) The dragon breathes euphoric gas in
a 10-foot cone. Each creature in the area must succeed at a DC 18 Fortitude save or
become stupefied 2 and slowed 1 for 1d4 rounds; on a critical failure, the duration is 1
minute. The faerie dragon can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
E-G
159

158
FAILED FLESHWARPS
Not every fleshwarp emerges
from its vat capable of survival.
Many perish within minutes, as
organs fundamental for life simply
fail or collapse in on themselves.
Fleshwarpers can usually recycle
failed fleshwarps back into the mix
quickly enough, but now and then,
remnants known as fleshdregs are
stable enough to live pain-wracked
lives of their own. These foul
creatures often infest fleshwarper
holdings, like rats or other vermin
do in less awful locations.
Fleshwarp
Some creatures, notably drow, are not happy with merely killing their enemies.
They revel in the total degradation of their foes through the horrifying
transformative technique known as fleshwarping. Though the fleshwarping
process was not created by the drow, many believe they perfected it. The drow
torture their enemies in vats of churning magical reagents, reshaping their flesh
and psyche alike into horrid and monstrous things. The reconstitution of flesh
results in countless variations of fleshwarps, and the following are just a couple
of examples of these horrors.
Grothlut
Sluglike abominations, grothluts are fleshwarps that were once humans. While
their head and torsos are vaguely human, their arms are rubbery and move
awkwardly at their sides. Wretched creatures, they moan piteously when other
creatures are near, perhaps as the last remnants of their shattered human
consciousness pleads to be free from their horrid warped form.
Many fleshwarpers consider the grothlut to be a failure of a creation, as the
transformation all but stamps out the human consciousness. Others disagree,
arguing that warping the creature’s mind makes it all the more useful, since
its stupidity makes it pliable and easy to herd. Drow typically use grothluts
as guardians that slowly patrol the edges of their enclaves. Once in position,
grothluts can be used as crude shock troops, unleashed to soften enemy forces
before more-valuable warriors wade in and cut down the enemies who have been
nauseated by the grothluts’ exploded organs and flesh.
GROTHLUT CREATURE 3
N MEDIUM ABERRATION MINDLESS
Perception +5; darkvision
Skills Athletics +11
Str +4, Dex –2, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –3
AC 19; Fort +11, Ref +5, Will +7
HP 50; Immunities acid, mental
Disgusting Demise (acid, poison) When the grothlut is reduced to 0 Hit Points, its
digestive organs rupture, unleashing alchemical acid and poison upon all creatures in
a 30-foot emanation. Each creature in the area must succeed at a DC 19 Fortitude save
or take 2d6 acid damage and become sickened 1 (double damage
and sickened 2 on a critical failure).
Piteous Moan (aura, auditory, emotion, mental, occult) 60 feet.
Each non-grothlut creature that enters or starts its turn within
the area must succeed at a DC 17 Will saving throw
or become sickened 1 (sickened 2 on a critical
failure). The creature then becomes temporarily
immune for 1 minute. The grothlut can activate
or deactivate the aura by using a single
free action that has the concentrate trait. A
grothlut usually does not begin moaning until it
senses the presence of a non-grothlut creature,
and it usually stops once it doesn’t sense
any more such creatures.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile),
Damage 1d10+8 slashing
Ranged [one-action] digestive spew
+7 (acid, range increment
15 feet, splash), Damage
2d6 acid damage plus
1d6 splash acid damage
E-G
159

158
OTHER FLESHWARPS
Grothluts may be the weakest
example of a fleshwarp, and
driders the most successful, but
others exist as well. Ghonhatines
are lumbering fleshwarps formed
from xulgaths, while the tentacled
irnakurses are formed from surfacedwelling elves. Sinspawn (pages
296–297) are fleshwarps as well, of
course, although their methods of
creation differ drastically from the
techniques mastered by drow.
Drider
The first fleshwarping process mastered by the drow remains both their most
successful and most infamous: the drider. Fusing the body of a drow with that
of a giant spider, driders are a sexually dimorphic fleshwarp-the only fleshwarp
known to be able to produce young. While female driders have the upper torsos
of elegant drow women with mouths featuring sharp poisoned fangs, male driders
have hideous, mutated countenances that further blend the humanoid form
with that of a spider; the difference in appearance is perhaps a reflection on the
matriarchal nature of drow society. In combat, all driders are equally dangerous.
Although the fleshwarping process was originally intended to be a punishment
for drow who fell from grace, the significant powers and strengths gained from the
horrifying transformation are attractive to some drow, and an increasing number of
lower-ranking citizens in drow cities volunteer themselves for the painful procedure.
In return for mandatory time (typically measured in decades) serving as a guardian,
soldier, or other public servant, such volunteer driders are later allowed to lead
their own lives, typically in caverns located in a city’s periphery. The painful truth is
that for most driders, they do not live long enough to see this reward, for the drow
have a penchant for working their fleshwarped slaves to death or deploying them in
deadly war missions in which survival is a only a remote possibility.
Most driders use arcane magic, but driders who use divine magic are well
known, while a rare few use occult or primal magic. A drider’s innate spells
remain the same regardless of the magical tradition, but those who use different
types of magic as prepared spells may well have entirely different spells prepared
than the drider presented below.
DRIDER CREATURE 6
CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +13; darkvision
Languages Elven, Undercommon
Skills Arcana +14, Athletics +12, Intimidation +14, Religion +13, Stealth +15
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +4
Items +1 composite longbow (20 arrows), glaive
AC 24; Fort +13, Ref +13, Will +15; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 95; Immunities sleep
Speed 30 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] glaive +16 (deadly 1d8, forceful, reach 10 feet), Damage
1d8+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] fangs +16, Damage 1d6+10 piercing plus drider venom
Ranged [one-action] composite longbow +16 (deadly d10, magical, propulsive, range
increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley 50 feet), Damage 1d8+8 piercing
Ranged [one-action] web +15 (range increment 30 feet), Effect web trap
Arcane Innate Spells DC 20; 4th clairvoyance, suggestion;
3rd clairaudience, dispel magic, levitate; 2nd darkness
(at will), faerie fire (at will); Cantrips (3rd) dancing lights,
detect magic
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 24, attack +17; 3rd fireball;
2nd acid arrow, invisibility; 1st magic missile (×2),
ray of enfeeblement; Cantrips (3rd) ghost sound,
mage hand, ray of frost
Drider Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 23
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d8 poison damage and
enfeebled 1 (1 round)
Web Trap A creature hit by
a drider’s web attack is
immobilized and stuck to
the nearest surface (Escape DC 21).
E-G
161

160
FLYTRAP TREASURE
Giant flytraps have enough
instinctual intellect to effectively
ambush prey or to move about to
seek out better hunting grounds,
but they don’t value treasure. Still,
a flytrap tends to accumulate a
small wealth of discarded loot
from those it has eaten, discarding
these shiny baubles in the
periphery of its root system once it
has finished digesting its meal.
Flytrap
Flytraps are dangerous creatures as eager to feed on humanoids and larger prey
as they are monstrous insects.
Snapping Flytrap
The snapping flytrap is a ravenous, carnivorous plant that is quick to bite at any
creature that passes by. Snapping flytraps typically have two sets of tooth-edged
leaves, each measuring 3 feet wide, at the end of 10-foot-long stalks.
SNAPPING FLYTRAP CREATURE 3
N LARGE MINDLESS PLANT
Perception +7; tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +11, Stealth +10 (+13 in undergrowth)
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +5 Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 18; Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +7
HP 50; Immunities mental; Weaknesses fire 5; Resistances acid 5
Quick Capture [reaction] Trigger A creature hits or touches the flytrap. Effect The flytrap
makes a leaf Strike against the triggering creature. If it hits, the creature is grabbed
in that leaf.
Speed 15 feet
Melee [one-action] leaf +11 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+2 piercing plus 1d6 acid and Improved Grab
Focused Assault [two-actions] The flytrap attacks a single target with both its leaves. The
flytrap makes one leaf Strike. On a success, the flytrap deals the damage from one
leaf Strike plus an additional 1d8 damage for every leaf beyond
the first. On a failure, the flytrap deals the damage from
one leaf Strike, but it can’t use Improved Grab. It deals no
damage on a critical failure. This counts toward the flytrap’s
multiple attack penalty as a number of attacks equal to the number of
leaves the flytrap has.
Hungry Flurry [two-actions] The flytrap makes two leaf Strikes at a –2
penalty, each against a different target. These attacks count
toward the flytrap’s multiple attack penalty, but the multiple
attack penalty doesn’t increase until after it makes all its attacks.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Medium, 1d8+1 bludgeoning plus 1d6 acid, Rupture 5
Giant Flytrap
Because they blend in so well with surrounding foliage, giant flytraps can use the
element of surprise to make quick strikes against unsuspecting adventurers and
forest travelers.
GIANT FLYTRAP CREATURE 10
N HUGE MINDLESS PLANT
Perception +17; tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Athletics +23, Stealth +21 (+24 in undergrowth)
Str +7, Dex +5, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +3, Cha –2
AC 29; Fort +21, Ref +17, Will +15
HP 185; Immunities mental; Weaknesses fire 10; Resistances acid 10
Quick Capture [reaction] As snapping flytrap.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] leaf +23 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+7 piercing
plus 2d6 acid and Improved Grab
Focused Assault[two-actions] As snapping flytrap, but it uses all
four of its leaves.
Hungry Flurry [two-actions] As snapping flytrap, but it makes four leaf
Strikes rather than two.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Large, 2d8+3 bludgeoning plus 2d6
acid, Rupture 17
E-G
161

160
GARGOYLE TREASURE
The obsessive nature of gargoyles
can result in a variety of treasure
hoards and grim trophy collections,
ranging from stockpiles of arcane
tomes to alchemical potions and
apparatuses to simple trinkets.
Gargoyle
Gargoyles are monstrous hunters made of elemental stone. They use their
resemblance to decorative statues to hide in plain sight in cities during the day and
descend upon unlucky pedestrians at night. Their most common form is that of a
horned humanoid with bat-like wings, but individual gargoyles show a great deal
of variation, with some appearing more or less humanoid and others resembling
no known creature. A gargoyle’s features are not fixed; city-dwelling gargoyles
who remain in the same locale long enough slowly morph, day by day, to match
the style of the local architecture. These patient monsters can stay disguised for
long stretches of time as they patiently await an opportunity to strike.
Gargoyles tend to be lone hunters, though sometimes they band into fearsome
tribes called “wings” for protection or sport. On rare occasions, wings become
relatively stable communities, and gargoyles in wings may even ally with other
creatures such as demons and intelligent aberrations, though these alliances
exist on a razor’s edge. The majority of gargoyles are treacherous, vindictive,
and petty-traits that preclude lasting partnerships. Many tend to be obsessive
and compulsive. Some are collectors, focusing on anything from books to grim
trophies, while others are ritualistic or overly passionate about niche intellectual
subjects or certain artistic motifs. These tendencies often contribute to the
dissolution of wings as individuals’ obsessions and compulsions clash.
Kapoacinth
Kapoacinths dwell not amid cliffs or rooftops, but beneath
the sea, using their wings to swim. These water-dwelling
gargoyles often dwell in shallow coastal regions
and shamble forth from the sea to attack prey.
Kapoacinths are less individualistic and tend to
create more stable wings for longer periods
of time. Kapoacinths have the same
abilities as the gargoyle presented below,
but with the following adjustments:
they have the aquatic trait, they have
a swim Speed of 40 feet instead of
a fly Speed, and their Clawed Feat
reaction triggers when they are
Swimming instead of Flying.
GARGOYLE CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM BEAST EARTH
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common, Terran
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +9,
Stealth +12
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –2, Wis +2,
Cha –2
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +10, Will +10
HP 40; Resistances physical 5 (except
adamantine)
Clawed Feet [reaction] (attack); Trigger The gargoyle
is Flying, and a creature moves into an adjacent
square below it. Effect The gargoyle makes a claw Strike against the triggering creature.
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +13, Damage 2d8+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +13 (agile), Damage 2d6+3 slashing
Statue [one-action] (concentrate) Until the next time it acts, the gargoyle appears to
be a statue. It has an automatic result of 32 on Deception checks and
DCs to pass as a statue.
E-G
163

162
Genie
A unique type of genie exists for each Elemental Plane, and the bodies of genies
are formed out of elemental matter corresponding to their native plane: djinn
are formed from wind, clouds, and storms; efreet are fire made flesh; marids are
beings of water; and shaitans are composed of metal, gems, and stone. Lastly, the
jann are formed out of all four elements, and are the weakest of geniekind.
Genie Nobles
Genie nobles with titles unique to their kind (as detailed in each sidebar) rule genie
society. Genie nobles are generally at least 5 levels higher than a typical example
of their kind. In addition to the increased statistics afforded by their higher levels,
genie nobles gain additional spells. But the most wondrous (and
notorious) of a genie noble’s powers is their ability to grant
wishes. Any genie noble (save for jann, who lack this power)
can grant a mortal or undead creature up to three wishes within
a year’s time. Many unscrupulous creatures compel genie nobles
to serve them, tricking them or entrapping them with magic. However,
once a genie noble grants a third wish to a single creature, they are
freed from service to that creature forever.
Janni
Jann are genies composed of all four elements, meaning they are not
quite home on any of the Elemental Planes. Instead, jann reside on the
Material Plane, making only brief forays to the other parts
of the Inner Sphere. Although they are human in size and
appearance, jann are not at all related to humans and
bristle at any claims to this effect. They are a proud people
and take great care to maintain their honor-restoring that
honor with the edge of a sword, if necessary.
JANNI CREATURE 4
N MEDIUM ELEMENTAL GENIE
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Common, one elemental language (Aquan,
Auran, Ignan, or Terran), one planar language (Abyssal,
Celestial, or Infernal); telepathy 100 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Arcana +10, Crafting +8,
Deception +7, Survival +11
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items composite shortbow (20 arrows), scimitar
AC 20; Fort +12, Ref +10, Will +11
HP 60; Resistances fire 5
Elemental Endurance A janni can survive on any Elemental
Plane for up to 48 hours, after which it takes 1 damage per hour
until it leaves or dies.
Speed 20 feet, fly 15 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +14 (forceful +1, sweep), Damage 1d6+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +14 (agile, magical, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+10 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] composite shortbow +12 (deadly 1d10, propulsive,
range increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 21; 7th plane shift (to Astral Plane,
Elemental Planes, or Material Plane only); 2nd create food,
invisibility (×3), speak with animals; 1st create water
Change Size [two-actions](arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation);
Frequency Once per day. Effect The janni changes a creature’s
size. This works as a 4th-level enlarge or shrink spell but can target
an unwilling creature (DC 21 Fortitude save negates).
DJINNI VIZIERS
Djinni viziers prefer to manifest
wishes in physical, often gaudy
displays, but cut corners in
quality. Wished-for gold, for
example, might only be gold
plated (and still valuable), not
solid gold. Djinni viziers add the
following to their innate spells:
5th summon giants, tongues.
E-G
163

162
EFREETI MALIKS
Efreeti maliks take pleasure in
fulfilling wishes in pedantic ways
that cause suffering, regret, or
pain. A wisher for a thousand
pounds of gemstones might have
the gems delivered as a bonecrushing avalanche. Efreeti maliks
add the following to their innate
spells: 5th fireball (at will); 7th
volcanic eruption.
Djinni
Benevolent genies from the Plane of Air, djinn value art, culture, knowledge, and
trade. They also love new experiences, succulent dishes, and heady wines. Of all
geniekind, they are most likely to approach humans and other mortals, interacting
with them on friendly terms. Still, djinn are proud of their genie heritage and have
a tendency to be patronizing toward mortals, a habit that has earned them a
reputation for arrogance.
Djinn get along with jann and marids, but they find shaitans too stiff and
harbor undying hatred for efreet. Although djinn are formidable combatants,
they despise war and prefer to eschew violence in favor of dealing with their
opponents using magic or subterfuge (making an exception, of course, when
they encounter efreet).
DJINNI CREATURE 5
UNCOMMON CG LARGE AIR ELEMENTAL GENIE
Perception +13; darkvision, detect magic
Languages Auran, Common
Skills Acrobatics +14, Arcana +11, Athletics +11, Crafting +9,
Deception +11, Diplomacy +13, Society +9, Stealth +12
Str +4, Dex +5, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items scimitar
AC 22; Fort +9, Ref +14, Will +11
HP 71; Immunities acid; Resistances mental 5, sonic 5
Whirlwind (air, arcane, aura, evocation) 20 feet. All
squares in the djinni’s aura are difficult terrain for
Striding and Flying creatures. Creatures with the
air trait are immune.
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +15 (forceful +1, reach 10 feet,
sweep), Damage 1d6+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +16 (agile, finesse, magical,
nonlethal, reach 10 feet), Damage
1d4+10 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] crashing wind +15 (air, arcane,
evocation, range increment 20 feet),
Damage 1d8+6 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 23; 7th plane shift
(at will; to Astral Plane, Elemental Planes, or
Material Plane only); 4th creation, gaseous form;
3rd illusory creature, illusory object; 2nd enhance
victuals (at will), invisibility (at will; self only); Constant (3rd)
detect magic
Hurricane Blast [one-action] (air, arcane, evocation); Frequency Once per
round. Effect The djinni all creatures in its whirlwind pushes
back 20 feet, or forces all creatures in the aura to move 20 feet
clockwise or counterclockwise. Each creature must attempt a DC 21
Fortitude save. On a success, it avoids being moved, and on a critical
failure it falls prone in addition to being moved. Creatures with the
air trait are immune.
Shaitan
Hailing from the Plane of Earth, shaitans are proud and brazen genies.
They value physical skill and love bargaining, games of chance, and working
with metal and stone. Immense gemstones and veins of precious
metal crisscross their home plane, and the industrious shaitans
have built a vast mercantile empire from these abundant
natural resources.
E-G
165

164
JANNI AMIRS
Janni amirs can’t grant wishes. They
add the following to their innate
spells: 4th read omens; Cantrips
(4th) detect magic (at will).
MARID SHAHZADAS
Marid shahzadas grant wishes in
ways that amuse them. They add
the following to their innate spells:
5th cone of cold (at will), illusory
creature (×2).
SHAITAN CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON LN LARGE EARTH ELEMENTAL GENIE
Perception +15; darkvision, detect magic, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Common, Terran
Skills Athletics +19, Crafting +14, Deception +16, Nature +15, Society +14
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items +1 falchion
AC 25; Fort +18, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 110; Resistances electricity 10
Speed 20 feet, burrow 45 feet, climb 20 feet; earth glide
Melee [one-action]falchion +20 (forceful +1, magical, reach 10 feet, sweep), Damage 1d10+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +19 (agile, magical, nonlethal, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d4+12 bludgeoning
plus Push 10 feet and shove into stone
Arcane Innate Spells DC 24; 7th plane shift (to Astral Plane, Elemental Planes, or Material
Plane only); 5th veil (self only), wall of stone; 4th shape stone (at will); 2nd glitterdust
(×2); Constant (4th) detect magic
Earth Glide The shaitan can Burrow through dirt and stone at its full burrow Speed,
leaving no tunnels or signs of its passing.
Shove into Stone (arcane, earth, transmutation) When the shaitan
Pushes a creature into a stone barrier, the target must succeed at a
DC 22 Reflex save or become merged with the barrier (as meld with
stone). The victim can attempt to Escape (DC 28).
Efreeti
The efreet are hateful and merciless genies from the Plane
of Fire, where they build metropolises and massive trade
centers that draw extraplanar travelers from across the
multiverse. They are cruel slavers, vengeful warmongers,
and sinister wish-masters; there are many tales of
mortals who made pacts with efreet only to have
their words twisted to suit a genie’s capricious and
malevolent whims.
Efreet do not readily treat with other genies;
they share an eternal feud with the djinn, disdain
marids, regard jann as weaklings unworthy of
the genie title, and only occasionally tolerate
alliances with shaitans. At 12 feet tall and
weighing 2,000 pounds, efreet are formidable
opponents and cow their chosen victims with
a glance.
EFREETI CREATURE 9
UNCOMMON LE LARGE ELEMENTAL FIRE GENIE
Perception +17; darkvision, detect magic
Languages Common, Ignan
Skills Arcana +14, Athletics +22, Crafting +14, Deception +19,
Diplomacy +17, Intimidation +19, Society +14
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items breastplate, +1 striking scimitar
AC 28; Fort +18, Ref +17, Will +20
HP 175; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 10
Speed 25 feet, fly 35 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +21 (fire, forceful +2, magical, reach 10
feet, sweep), Damage 2d6+11 slashing plus 2d6 fire
Melee [one-action] fist +20 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d4+11
bludgeoning plus 2d6 fire
Arcane Innate Spells DC 29, attack +19; 7th plane shift (at will; to Astral Plane, 
E-G
165

164
SHAITAN PASHAS
Shaitan pashas fulfill wishes as
efficiently as possible. A wish
granted might create a temporary
reality-a wish for a pet dragon
might find the dragon lasts only
a day before it vanishes or dies.
Shaitan pashas add the following
to their innate spells: 8th
earthquake; 6th flesh to stone,
stoneskin (at will; self only).
Elemental Planes, or Material Plane only) 5th illusory object; 4th gaseous form,
invisibility (×2); Cantrips (5th) produce flame; Constant (5th) detect magic
Burning Grasp (fire) When the efreeti grabs a creature, that creature takes 2d6 fire
damage, and takes 2d6 fire damage at the end of each of its turns as long as it
remains grabbed.
Change Size [two-actions](arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation); as janni (DC 29).
Combat Grab [one-action] Requirements The efreeti has one hand free. Effect The efreeti makes
a melee Strike while keeping one hand free. If the Strike hits, the target is grabbed in
the efreeti’s free hand.
Marid
Marids are capricious but powerful genies from the Plane of Water; among
geniekind, they are rivaled in power only by the fiery efreet. Marids embody
the strength of the ocean’s waves and currents, but they also have a gentler side,
loving performance and art such as dancing, music, and storytelling.
Marids regard efreet with hostility but rarely encounter them in their native
environment. They get along with djinn, jann, and shaitans, although the
latter consider marids flighty and annoying, associating only long enough to
close trade deals. Marid society has strict rules of hospitality, and many marid
cities have a magically sealed foreign quarter where marid shahzadas conduct
business with air-breathers.
MARID CREATURE 9
UNCOMMON CN LARGE ELEMENTAL GENIE WATER
Perception +18; darkvision, detect alignment, detect magic,
wavesense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aquan, Common
Skills Athletics +20 (+24 to swim), Crafting +16,
Diplomacy +19, Nature +18, Performance +16,
Society +14, Stealth +18
Str +5, Dex +5, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +3,
Cha +3
Items +1 striking trident
AC 28; Fort +18, Ref +21, Will +17
HP 145; Resistances fire 10
Vortex (aura, water) 40 feet. Water in the aura that is also in the same body
of water as the marid is difficult terrain for Swimming creatures. Creatures
with the water trait are immune.
Speed 20 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] trident +21 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+11 piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +20 (agile, magical, nonlethal, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d4+11
bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] trident +21 (magical, thrown 20 feet), Damage 2d8+11 piercing
Arcane Innate Spells DC 28; 7th plane shift (at will; to Astral Plane, Elemental
Planes, or Material Plane only) 5th control water (at will), hallucinatory terrain;
4th hydraulic push (at will), hydraulic torrent, solid fog; 2nd blur (at will), illusory
object; Constant (5th) detect magic; (1st) detect alignment (evil or good only)
Change Shape [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, polymorph, transmutation) The marid can
take on the appearance of any water elemental or humanoid. This ability
doesn’t change the marid’s Speed or its attack and damage bonuses with
its Strikes.
Rush of Water [two-actions] (arcane, evocation, water) The marid releases a jet of water
in a 60-foot line, dealing 9d6 bludgeoning damage (DC 28 basic Reflex save).
A creature that fails its save is also pushed 10 feet (20 feet on a critical failure).
The marid can’t use Rush of Water again for 1d4 rounds.
Skewer [one-action] The marid makes a trident Strike, dealing an extra 2d6
persistent bleed damage on a hit (4d6 on a critical hit).
E-G
167

166
CUSTOM GHOSTS
Ghosts work best in adventures
when used sparingly. As they are
remnants of a past life and retain
their intelligence, ghosts can
convey long-lost information or
serve as a way to inform the PCs
of crucial story elements. In this
way, a ghost in an adventure can
provide a clue or even a complete
history of a site or event. Unlike
most other undead, ghosts can
retain the alignment they had in
life, but regardless they should
remain tragic and frightening
figures in play.
Ghost
When some mortals die through tragic circumstances or without closure, they can
linger on in the world. These anguished souls haunt a locale significant to them in
life, constantly trying to right their perceived wrong or wrongdoings.
Creating a Ghost
While it’s best to create custom ghosts to fill an adventure’s specific needs, you
can also use the following guidelines to turn existing living creatures into ghosts.
First, increase the creature’s level by 2 and change its statistics as follows.
• Increase AC, saves, Perception, DCs, and skill modifiers by 2. Increase
the most appropriate melee attack modifier by 4 to become ghostly hand
(described below), and other attack modifiers by 2.
• A ghost has a Strength modifier of –5 and a Constitution modifier of +0.
• Do not modify the ghost’s Hit Points due to its new level.
Ghost Abilities
A ghost gains the incorporeal, spirit, and undead traits. Many become evil. If the
base creature has any abilities or traits that come from it being a living, corporeal
creature, it loses them. You might also need to adjust some abilities that conflict
with the theme of a ghost. All ghosts gain the following abilities.
Darkvision
Site Bound A typical ghost can stray only a short distance from where it was killed or the
place it haunts. A typical limit is 120 feet. Some ghosts are instead bound to a room,
building, item, or creature that was special to it rather than a location.
Negative Healing
Rejuvenation (divine, necromancy) When a ghost is destroyed, it re-forms after 2d4 days
within the location it’s bound to, fully healed. A ghost can be permanently destroyed
only if someone determines the reason for its existence and sets right whatever
prevents the spirit from resting.
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision, unconscious
Resistances all damage 5 (except force, ghost touch, or positive; double resistance to
non-magical). This resistance increases to 10 at 9th level and 15 at 16th level.
Fly Speed equal to its Speed
Ghostly Hand All ghosts have a ghostly hand unarmed attack that deals negative
damage. It typically has the agile, finesse, and magical traits. Some ghosts wield
ghostly memories of weapons they held in life, but the effect is the same.
Special Abilities
Select one or two of the following abilities, or potentially three if the ghost is
9th level or higher. These abilities should relate to the ghost’s death or its history.
You can also create new abilities or adapt those from monsters or classes to fit the
theme. For DCs, use 2 + the DC of the ghost’s level (Core Rulebook 503).
Corrupting Gaze[two-actions]The ghost stares at a creature it can see within 30 feet. The target
takes 1d6 negative damage + 1d6 per 2 levels with a basic Will save. A creature that
fails its save is also stupefied 1 for 1 minute.
Draining Touch [two-actions] With a touch, the ghost attempts to drain a living creatureʼs life
force. It makes a ghostly hand Strike but deals no damage on a hit. Instead, the target
becomes drained 1 for 1 day, and the ghost regains HP equal to half its own level.
Frightful Moan [two-actions] (auditory, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, mental) The ghost
laments its fate, forcing each living creature within 30 feet to attempt a Will save.
On a failure, a creature becomes frightened 2 (or frightened 3 on a critical failure).
On a success, a creature is temporarily immune to this ghost’s frightful moan for
1 minute.
Inhabit Object [one-action] The ghost possesses an object of size Large or smaller within 20 feet,
making it an animated object (pages 20–21). This animated object’s level can be no
higher than the ghost’s level – 2. If the target object is being held by a creature, the
bearer can attempt a Will save to prevent the possession. This possession ends when 
E-G
167

166
BUILDING GHOSTS
Note that the ghost mage is built
from the ground up, rather than by
applying the ghost rules to a onceliving creature, so its numbers
don’t exactly match the values
listed above. This is usually the
better way to go if you have the
time, as it allows you to hand-craft
a ghost for the situation.
the object is destroyed or the ghost leaves it. At this point, the ghost reappears in the
object’s square and can’t Inhabit an Object again for 1d4 rounds.
Malevolent Possession [two-actions] The ghost attempts to possess an adjacent corporeal
creature. This has the same effect as the possession spell, except since the ghost
doesn’t have a physical body, it is unaffected by that restriction of the spell.
Telekinetic Assault [two-actions] (divine, evocation) The ghost cries out in pain and anguish as
small objects and debris fly about in a 30-foot emanation. Creatures in this area take
1d6 bludgeoning damage + 1d6 per 2 levels, subject to a basic Reflex save.
Ghost commoner
The ghost commoner is an ordinary person who believes they died unjustly,
usually due to foul play or betrayal.
GHOST COMMONER CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM GHOST INCORPOREAL SPIRIT UNDEAD
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Dwelling Lore +10 (applies to the place the ghost is bound to), Stealth +12
Str –5, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +2
Site Bound
AC 20; Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +8
HP 30, negative healing, rejuvenation; Immunities death
effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision, unconscious;
Resistances all damage 5 (except force, ghost touch, or positive;
double resistance vs. non-magical)
Rejuvenation (divine, necromancy) Setting right the injustice that led to
the commonerʼs death allows it to move on to the afterlife.
Speed fly 25 feet
Melee [one-action]ghostly hand +13 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 2d6+2 negative
Frightful Moan [one-action](auditory, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, mental) DC 21
Ghost Mage
A wizard who died with a major project left undone might become a ghost
mage, constantly seeking to finish its task in undeath.
GHOST MAGE CREATURE 10
CE MEDIUM GHOST INCORPOREAL SPIRIT UNDEAD
Perception +17; darkvision
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Arcana +22, Intimidation +22, Stealth +21
Str –5, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +6, Wis +3, Cha +6
Site Bound
AC 27; Fort +16, Ref +19, Will +22
HP 135, negative healing, rejuvenation; Immunities death
effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision, unconscious;
Resistances all damage 10 (except force, ghost touch, or
positive; double resistance vs. non-magical)
Rejuvenation (divine, necromancy) Completing the ghost
mage’s project allows it to move on to the afterlife.
Speed fly 25 feet
Melee [one-action] ghostly hand +21 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 2d8+12 negative
Arcane Innate Spells DC 29, attack +23; 5th cone of cold, hallucination; 4th phantasmal
killer, suggestion; 3rd blindness, dispel magic, nondetection; 2nd telekinetic maneuver
(×2); 1st ray of enfeeblement (×2); Cantrips (5th) detect magic, ghost sound, mage
hand, prestidigitation, read magic
Frightful Moan [one-action] (auditory, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, mental) DC 29
Telekinetic Assault[two-actions] (divine, evocation) 6d6 bludgeoning, DC 29
E-G
169

168
THE FIRST GHOULS
Legend holds that the first
humanoid (an elf, as it so
happened) to feed upon the flesh
of his brother rose as a ghoul
after death, in time embracing his
new life and ascending to great
power as a demon lord of ghouls,
graves, and secrets kept by the
dead. That ghouls of humanoids
warp and twist to take vaguely
elven features, and that elves
themselves are immune to ghoul
paralysis, are unusual side effects
of this ancient source, yet today,
ghouls are as likely to worship
other vile gods-or simply eschew
faith entirely-as they are to honor
the first of their kind.
Ghoul
Few creatures are more ubiquitous to sinister locations such as lonely graveyards
and ruined crypts than the flesh-eating undead known as ghouls.
Creating Ghouls
You can turn a living creature into a ghoul by completing the following steps. When
creating a ghast, double these numerical adjustments. The monsters in this section
are built from the ground up, so their numbers don’t match these guidelines exactly.
Custom-building ghouls is recommended if you have time, using the special abilities
listed here but creating the other statistics to match what you want the ghoul to be.
First, increase the creature’s level by 1 and change its statistics as follows.
• Increase its AC, attack bonuses, DCs, saving throws, and skill modifiers by 1.
• Increase its damage with Strikes and other offensive abilities by 1. If the
creature is limited in how often it can use an ability (such as a breath
weapon), increase the damage by 2 instead.
Ghoul Abilities
A ghoul gains the undead and ghoul traits, and it usually becomes evil. If the base
creature has any abilities that come from it being a living creature, it loses them. It
also loses any traits that represented its life as a living creature, such as human and
humanoid. You might also need to adjust abilities that conflict with the theme of a
ghoul. All ghouls gain the following abilities. The save DC for all abilities uses the DC
of the ghoul’s level (Core Rulebook 503).
Darkvision
Negative Healing
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Claws If the creature had hands, it gains a claw Strike (an agile
unarmed attack that deals slashing damage plus paralysis). If
it had any agile attacks, the damage dealt by its claws should
be roughly the same as the damage dealt by those attacks. If it
had only non-agile attacks, its claws should deal threequarters that damage.
Jaws If the creature had a mouth, it gains a jaws
Strike (an unarmed attack that deals slashing damage
plus ghoul fever and paralysis). The damage amount
should be the same as the creature’s non-agile attacks.
Consume Flesh [one-action] (manipulate) Requirements The
ghoul is adjacent to the corpse of a creature that died
within the last hour. Effect The ghoul devours a chunk of
the corpse and regains 1d6 Hit Points plus 1d6 for every 2 levels it has. It
can regain Hit Points from any given corpse only once.
Ghoul Fever (disease) Saving Throw Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no ill
effect (1 day); Stage 2 2d6 negative damage and regains half as many Hit Points from
all healing (1 day); Stage 3 as stage 2 (1 day); Stage 4 2d6 negative damage and gains
no benefit from healing (1 day); Stage 5 as stage 4 (1 day); Stage 6 dead, and rises as a
ghoul the next midnight.
Paralysis (incapacitation, occult, necromancy) Any living, non-elf creature hit by a ghoul’s
attack must succeed at a Fortitude save or become paralyzed. It can attempt a new save
at the end of each of its turns, and the DC cumulatively decreases by 1 on each such save.
Swift Leap [one-action] (move) The ghoul jumps up to half its Speed. This movement doesn’t
trigger reactions.
Ghast Abilities
A ghast has all the abilities above, plus following additions.
Stench (aura, olfactory) 10 feet A creature entering the aura or
starting its turn in the aura must succeed at a Fortitude save
(use a DC based on the monster’s level; Core Rulebook 503) 
E-G
169

168
GHOULISH SOCIETY
Ghouls are quite intelligent and,
more so than almost any other
undead, prone to forming societies
and cultures (if vile and repugnant
ones centered around flesh eating
and acts of depravity) in tangled
warrens below boneyards, or even
entire cities hidden away in the
depths of the Darklands.
or become sickened 1 (plus slowed 1 as long as itʼs sickened on a critical failure). While
within the aura, the creature takes a –2 circumstance penalty to saves against disease
and to recover from the sickened condition. A creature that succeeds at its save is
temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Claws and Jaws As ghoul, but apply ghast fever instead of ghoul fever.
Consume Flesh [one-action] As ghoul, but it regains 1d6 additional Hit Points.
Ghast Fever (disease) Saving Throw Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect (1 day); Stage 2
3d8 negative damage and regains half as many Hit Points from all healing (1 day); Stage 3
as stage 2 (1 day); Stage 4 3d8 negative damage and gains no benefit from healing (1 day);
Stage 5 as stage 4 (1 day); Stage 6 dead, and rises as a ghast the next midnight
Paralysis (incapacitation, occult, necromancy) As ghoul, but elves are not immune.
Ghoul
Ghouls are ravenous undead who haunt graveyards and eat corpses.
GHOUL CREATURE 1
CE MEDIUM GHOUL UNDEAD
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +4, Stealth +7,
Survival +5
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 16; Fort +4, Ref +9, Will +5
HP 20, negative healing; Immunities
death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Speed 30 feet, burrow 5 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +9 (finesse), Damage 1d6+1 piercing plus ghoul fever
and paralysis
Melee [one-action] claw +9 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+1 slashing plus
paralysis
Consume Flesh [one-action] (manipulate) See Ghoul Abilities. The ghoul
regains 1d6 Hit Points.
Ghoul Fever (disease) See Ghoul Abilities; DC 15.
Paralysis (incapacitation, occult, necromancy) See Ghoul Abilities;
DC 15.
Swift Leap [one-action] (move) See Ghoul Abilities.
Ghast
Ghasts-feral, foul-smelling, and constantly hungry-are the more powerful kin of
ghouls. They are relentless in the pursuit of their prey.
GHAST CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM GHOUL UNDEAD
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +7, Stealth +10, Survival +8
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 18; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +8
HP 30, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Stench (aura, olfactory) 10 feet. See Ghast Abilities; DC 16.
Speed 30 feet, burrow 5 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11 (finesse), Damage 1d6+5 piercing plus ghast fever and paralysis
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+5 slashing plus paralysis
Consume Flesh [one-action] (manipulate) See Ghast Abilities. The ghast regains 3d6 Hit Points.
Ghast Fever (disease) See Ghast Abilities; DC 16.
Paralysis (incapacitation, occult, necromancy) See Ghast Abilities; DC 16.
Swift Leap [one-action] (move) See Ghast Abilities.
E-G
171

170
OVERSIZED THEMES
Giants are larger-than-life foes.
While many giants have themes
that tie them to elemental or
magical forces, the primary theme
giants share is that they embody a
classic cultural trope as their basis.
Fire giants, for example, can be
seen as oversized smiths, while
hill giants should evoke the
flavor of an oversized bully.
Giant
Giants are massive humanoid creatures who live in remote regions throughout
the world. They are divided into a number of subtypes.
Hill Giant
Selfish and crude, these rough-skinned raiders are bullies and ultimately cowards.
Quick-tempered and fond of violence, a hill giant gladly raids and pillages the
defenseless but is quick to flee from those who are bigger, stronger, or better
organized than they are. A hill giant is never above shoving or tricking one of their
own kind to slow down their opponent or get the best loot.
HILL GIANT CREATURE 7
CE LARGE EARTH GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +13; low-light vision
Language Common, Jotun
Skills Athletics +19, Intimidation +11
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items greatclub, hide armor, sack with 5 rocks
AC 24; Fort +17, Ref +12, Will +13
HP 140
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action]greatclub +19 (backswing, reach 10 feet, shove), Damage 1d10+14 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] fist +19 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +19 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 1d8+14 bludgeoning
Throw Rock [one-action]
Wide Swing [one-action] The hill giant makes a single greatclub Strike and compares the attack
roll result to the ACs of up to two foes within its reach. This counts as two attacks
for the hill giant’s multiple attack penalty.
Stone Giant
Stone giants are stoic, reclusive herders and artists who have a rich
history and collection of traditions. They dwell in caves in tall
mountains and craggy ranges, where their grayish skin allows
them to blend in with their surroundings and go unnoticed by
imperceptive adventurers. Those benign travelers who come
across a tribe of stone giants need not worry much, however,
for stone giants do not actively invite confrontation or strife.
They are, by and large, a peaceful people who seek wisdom
through exploration of nature and long meditations on
the elements of the natural world. Their elders are the wisest of stone
giants, and use their charisma and druidic magic to lead their tribes to
prosperity and harmony with nature.
A typical stone giant stands 12 feet in height and weighs about
1,500 pounds.
STONE GIANT CREATURE 8
N LARGE EARTH GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +20, Intimidation +14, Stealth +14 (+18 in rocky terrain)
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items +1 striking greatclub, sack with 5 rocks
AC 27; Fort +18, Ref +14, Will +14
HP 150
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 35 feet
E-G
171

170
GIANT LOCATIONS
As oversized as they are, giants
tend to dwell in remote regions of
the world, where they have the
luxury of claiming
larger territories of
their own.
Melee [one-action] greatclub +21 (backswing, magical, reach 10 feet, shove), Damage
2d10+12 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] fist +20 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+14 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +18 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 2d6+12 bludgeoning
Big Swing [two-actions] The stone giant makes a greatclub Strike. The target is Pushed up to 10
feet on a hit or up to 20 feet on a critical hit. If the target collides with a solid object or
lands on the ground, it takes bludgeoning damage as though it had fallen the distance
it moved.
Throw Rock [one-action]
Frost Giant
Frost giants are remorseless marauders who
pillage and plunder from those who dare to live near
them in desolate, frigid lands. Their clans range from extremely
territorial hunters who claim an expanse of tundra and defend
it at all costs to nomadic hordes that roam icy slopes in
search of settlements to conquer. Frost giant clans are
ruled by those who exhibit the greatest ferocity and
prowess in battle-massive brutes who proclaim
themselves jarl and demand absolute obedience from
their followers. If at any time a frost giant wishes to
be a jarl, all they must do is issue a challenge to the
current jarl and face off in mortal combat, after which
the reigning champion continues leading the clan or the
victorious challenger assumes control.
Frost giants live in frostbitten realms, and their
appearance is reflective of a people weathered and hardened by
relentless snowstorms and freezing temperatures. They often wear
metal armor adorned with the furs, skin, teeth, and tusks of slain
beasts and heft weapons as long as dining tables. Their flesh ranges
from pale blue to shale gray, and their hair is typically a dingy white or
dirty yellow color.
A typical frost giant stands about 15 feet tall and weighs
approximately 2,800 pounds.
FROST GIANT CREATURE 9
CE LARGE COLD GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +17; low-light vision
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Athletics +23, Crafting +18, Intimidation +18, Stealth +17 (+21
in snow)
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +5, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items breastplate, +1 striking greataxe, sack with 5 rocks
AC 29; Fort +23, Ref +16, Will +16
HP 150; Immunities cold; Weaknesses fire 10
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 30 feet; ice stride
Melee [one-action] greataxe +21 (magical, reach 10 feet, sweep), Damage
2d12+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +21 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+12 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +21 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage
2d10+9 bludgeoning
Chill Breath [one-action] (cold, evocation, primal) The frost giant breathes out
a 15-foot cone of freezing moisture that quickly condenses into
ice, dealing 4d6 cold damage. Each creature in the cone
must attempt a DC 28 basic Reflex save. A creature
that fails its save is also immobilized and takes 2d6 
E-G
173

172
GIANT BAGS
Giants often keep an eclectic
collection of treasures in their
knapsacks or bags. Among these
can be found a staggeringly wide
range of unexpected and odd
treasures and valuables.
cold damage at the end of each of its turns until it gets free (Escape DC 28). The giant
can’t use Chill Breath again for 1d4 rounds.
Ice Stride A frost giant isn’t impeded by difficult terrain caused by snow or ice, nor does
it need to attempt Acrobatics checks to keep from falling on slippery ice.
Throw Rock [one-action]
Wide Swing [one-action] The frost giant makes a single greataxe Strike and compares the attack
roll result to the ACs of up to two foes within its reach. This counts as two attacks
for the frost giant’s multiple attack penalty.
Fire Giant
The most militaristic of all giants, fire giants focus obsessively on learning
combat techniques, mastering the arts of forging weapons and armor,
and finding new ways to dominate their enemies. As a result, their
social and political structures are grounded firmly in martial
hierarchies, with a strict emphasis on following the
orders of one’s superior, no matter if you are
accountable to a lowly soldier or report to
a powerful officer. As soon as a fire giant
can walk, they are fitted with their
first suit of forged armor. This armor
is constantly remolded and replaced
as the fire giant matures, both to ensure they are
comfortable with steel against their skin and also
to teach the giant as early as possible that they bear the
burden of fighting to protect their traditions and way of life. To
a fire giant, death is the flame in which the future is forged.
Fire giants are usually identified by their powerful stature, bright-orange hair
that flickers and dances as if it were aflame, and heavy steel armor worn over
garments of crimson, amber, or black. Most fire giants are covered in scars and
refuse to conceal or obstruct them, as each jagged mark serves as a reminder of
a valuable lesson they learned in battle. A typical fire giant stands 12 to 16 feet
tall, weighs about 7,000 pounds, and lives to be 350 years old.
FIRE GIANT CREATURE 10
LE LARGE FIRE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +18; low-light vision
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Athletics +25, Crafting +22, Intimidation +23
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items +1 striking greatsword, +1 half plate, sack with 5 rocks
AC 31; Fort +23, Ref +16, Will +18
HP 175; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] greatsword +24 (magical, reach 10 feet, versatile P), Damage
2d12+13 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +23 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+13 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +23 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 2d8+13
bludgeoning plus 1d6 fire
Flaming Stroke [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The fire giant imbues its blade with
flames and makes a greatsword Strike with a –2 circumstance penalty against
each creature in a 15-foot line. It makes only one attack roll and compares the
result to each creature’s AC. This Strike deals an additional 1d6 fire damage
and counts as one attack for the fire giant’s multiple attack penalty.
Throw Rock [one-action] (fire) A rock thrown by a fire giant deals an additional
1d6 fire damage on a hit.
E-G
173

172
Cloud Giant
The graceful and regal cloud giants have skin of milky white to powdery blue.
Unlike most giants, cloud giants are quite morally diverse. A handful are neutral,
but of the others, roughly half are good, while the other half are evil. Good cloud
giants are often civic-minded builders of roads and settlements, and are interested
in trading goods as well as cultural innovations. It’s not uncommon for such
giants to approach their neighbors with diplomacy and build strong relationships
with other peaceful peoples. Conversely, evil cloud giants are often isolationist
and xenophobic. Preferring hidden mountain valleys and settlements in the caves
and among the crags of lonely peaks, they raid for what they want and treat other
creatures like inconsequential insects. These opposing philosophies can generate
a great deal of strife among neighboring cloud giant communities, and the raiders
often threaten the trade deals of their peaceful cousins.
Legends persist of floating cities ruled by magically gifted cloud giant
queens and kings. While most cloud giants plainly state that such claims
are pure fantasy, others are mysteriously tight-lipped or evasive about
the matter.
CLOUD GIANT CREATURE 11
N HUGE AIR GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +22; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Athletics +26, Crafting +21, Diplomacy +24, Intimidation +26,
Performance +21
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +5, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items +1 striking ranseur, sack with 5 rocks
AC 30; Fort +25, Ref +18, Will +21
HP 220
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] ranseur +25 (disarm, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage
2d10+13 piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +24 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage
2d8+13 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +24 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage
2d10+13 bludgeoning
Primal Innate Spells DC 30; 4th solid fog; 3rd levitate (at will); 2nd obscuring
mist (at will)
Throw Rock [one-action]
Wind Strike [two-actions] (air, evocation, primal) The cloud giant Strikes a creature
with its ranseur, surrounded in a roar of rushing air. On a hit, the target
takes an additional 4d8 bludgeoning damage and is deafened for 1
minute. Whether or not the Strike hits, each non-cloud giant within a
20-foot emanation, including the target of the Strike, is buffeted by
roaring winds and must attempt a DC 30 Fortitude saving throw.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes 2d8 sonic damage.
Failure The creature takes 4d8 sonic damage and is deafened until the
end of its next turn.
Critical Failure As failure, but double damage and also knocked prone.
Storm Giant
Storm giants are looming but benevolent stewards of sea and sky,
often serving as the natural guardians of tropical islands, coastlines,
or rocky archipelagos. Storm giants tend to rapidly shift in mood and
behavior, one moment engaging in peaceful negotiation, the next unleashing
GIANT PETS
As with many people, giants
enjoy keeping pets. Yet for giants,
what constitutes a pet is often
categorized as beast to others.
Large animals like bears and
lions, and megafauna like woolly
mammoths and dinosaurs are
popular, as are more magical
creatures like hell hounds,
manticores, griffons, and the like.
E-G
175

174
OTHER GIANTS
Beyond the giants detailed here,
many others dwell in remote
regions of the world. Marsh
giants are cultists who worship
strange sea deities, shadow giants
have ties to the Shadow Plane,
and mountain giants are horrific
butchers even other giants fear.
unbridled ferocity against their foes. In this way, they embody both the fury of a
raging tempest and the calm of a hurricane’s eye. This can make them valuable
allies who race to the aid of those in need, but their allies remain must be alert
and mindful of their mood, as the giants can be quick to anger or aggressive
when caution is most appropriate.
Most storm giants have complexions akin to the crystal blue of the ocean or the
warm violet of a sky touched by the setting sun. Their hair tends to be dark purple,
blue, or black, and their eyes often have a silvery sheen. A typical storm giant stands
21 feet tall, weighs 12,000 pounds, and lives to be about 600 years old.
STORM GIANT CREATURE 13
CG HUGE AMPHIBIOUS GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +24; low-light vision
Languages Auran, Common, Draconic, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +20, Athletics +27, Crafting +24, Intimidation
+24, Perform +22, Sense Motive +24
Str +8, Dex +1, Con +6, Int +3, Wis +5, Cha +2
Items +1 striking greatsword, sack with 5
rocks
AC 34; Fort +28, Ref +21, Will +23
HP 235; Immunities electricity
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 35 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] greatsword +28
(magical, reach 15 feet, versatile P),
Damage 2d12+16 slashing plus 1d6 electricity
Melee [one-action] fist +27 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+16 bludgeoning plus
1d6 electricity
Ranged [one-action] rock +37 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 2d10+16 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 33; 6th chain lightning (×3); 5th control weather (at will); 3rd
levitate (at will); Constant (4th) freedom of movement
Lightning Blade thre[three-actions] (electricity, evocation, primal) The storm giant raises one hand
to the sky, channeling a bolt of lightning into the blade held in the other. The giant
makes a greatsword Strike with a –2 circumstance penalty against each creature
within its reach. It makes only one attack roll and compares the result against each
creature’s AC. This Strike deals an additional 3d12 electricity damage and counts as
two attacks for the giant’s multiple attack penalty.
Throw Rock [one-action]
Wide Swing [one-action] The storm giant makes a single greatsword Strike and compares
the attack roll result to the ACs of up to two foes within its reach. This counts as
two attacks for the giant’s multiple attack penalty.
Rune Giant
Magically crafted and bred by ancient wizards, rune giants are anathema to
and tyrants among their own kind, who were given power to command and
magically control other giants. The rune giants themselves served even more
powerful masters-potent wizards known as runelords-and in so doing
commanded entire armies of giants on behalf of the runelords’ empires.
In the eons since these empires collapsed, rune giants have persisted as a
people of their own, though to the outside world they’re little more than
fabled horrors whispered of late at night by superstitious giants. Rune giants
usually dwell in the most remote and rugged of towering mountain ranges,
but they can also be found in immense ruins atop lost islands, glacial valleys,
or even more remote or magical regions.
Rune giants’ striking charcoal flesh is decorated by dozens of runes, which
are potent manifestations of their eldritch powers. Rune giants are towering
creatures, averaging at 40 feet in height and weighing 25,000 pounds.
E-G
175

174
THE FIRST RUNE GIANTS
On Golarion, the first rune giants
were created by the powerful
rulers of the ancient nation of
Thassilon, The runelords gifted
rune giants their ability to control
other giants, using them to
command armies of oversized
builders and soldiers to create and
defend oversized structures.
RUNE GIANT CREATURE 16
UNCOMMON LE GARGANTUAN EVIL GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +28; low-light vision
Languages Common, Jotun, Terran
Skills Arcana +28, Athletics +32, Crafting +28, Intimidation +28, Society +27
Str +9, Dex +2, Con +7, Int +2, Wis +6, Cha +4
Items +2 greater striking greatsword, +1 striking longspear, +1 splint mail
AC 38; Fort +33, Ref +26, Will +28
HP 330; Immunities fire
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] The rune giant gains
an additional reaction at the beginning of
each of its turns that it can only use for an
Attack of Opportunity.
Catch Rock [reaction]
Speed 45 feet; air walk
Melee [one-action] greatsword +33 (magical, reach 20 feet, versatile P), Damage 3d12+17 slashing
Melee [one-action] longspear +32 (magical, reach 25 feet), Damage 2d8+17 piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +31 (agile, reach 20 feet), Damage 3d8+17 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock +31 (brutal, range increment 120 feet), Damage 2d12+17 bludgeoning
Arcane Innate Spells DC 35; 8th charm, suggestion; 6th dominate (×3), true seeing; 5th
sending; 4th charm (at will), suggestion (at will); Constant (4th) air walk
Command Giants When a rune giant casts a mental spell against another giant, the DC
is 39, rather than 35.
Demand [free-action] (arcane, enchantment, mental); When a rune giant casts its innate sending
spell, it can also cast suggestion on the target.
Flashing Runes [free-action] (arcane, evocation, light); Trigger The rune giant uses an
arcane ability or casts an arcane spell. Effect The runes on the giant’s
body flash as they produce magical energy. Each creature within
a 10-foot emanation must attempt a DC 35 Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is dazzled for 1 round.
Failure The creature is blinded for 1 round.
Invoke Rune [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, electricity, evocation)
The rune giant invokes one of the runes on its body, causing the rune to spray
forth a 30-foot cone of sparks that deals 6d12 electricity damage to all
creatures in the cone (DC 37 basic Reflex save).
A glowing copy of the invoked rune appears on a single weapon
the giant holds, granting the weapon one effect listed below of
the giant’s choice. The giant can’t use Invoke Rune again for 1d4
rounds. The effect on the weapon lasts for 1 minute. If the giant
places a new rune on a weapon, any previously placed rune
immediately vanishes, ending its effect.
• Rune of Destruction The weapon gains the deadly trait
with three weapon damage dice of the same die size as
for the base weapon, and a creature hit with the weapon
is drained 1 unless it succeeds at a DC 35 Fortitude save.
• Rune of Flames The weapon deals an additional 3d6
fire damage on all attacks.
• Rune of Smiting When the weapon hits, the giant
can Push the target back 10 feet, or 20 feet on a
critical hit.
Throw Rock [one-action]
Wide Swing [one-action] The rune giant makes a single
greatsword Strike and compares the attack roll
result to the ACs of up to two foes within
its reach. This counts as two attacks for the
giant’s multiple attack penalty.
E-G
177

176
GIBBERING MOUTHER
TREASURE
While gibbering mouthers have
little interest in treasure, they are
known to consume their prey’s
valuables along with the creatures’
flesh. Those treasures which are
not themselves digestible remain
until the gibbering mouther
disgorges them or is destroyed.
Gibbering Mouther
Amorphous blobs of yammering mouths and oozing, fleshy sludge, gibbering
mouthers are among the strangest creatures found either aboveground or below.
Perpetually ravenous, these aberrations are always seeking their next meals,
ever eating but never sated. With a nominal intelligence, gibbering mouthers
can understand and even speak Aklo, but they do so in an intelligible manner
only rarely. Instead, their innumerable mouths constantly jabber and babble in a
stream of sound that disrupts the thought patterns of other creatures in the area.
Where, how, and why gibbering mouthers originated are questions without answers.
They share certain similarities with the much more powerful shoggoths, leading to
theories that the two creatures share an origin; less charitable scholars have suggested
that the gibbering mouther is instead a mortal’s attempt to create something akin to
a shoggoth-though the question of why remains unanswered. Still others believe
gibbering mouthers were sent to the world by the gods as a punishment for some
forgotten but surely terrible transgression. Gibbering mouthers themselves have little
to say on the matter-at least, not in any sort of sense. Scholars have wasted countless
hours in attempts to make sense of gibbering mouthers’ noises-studies that put
researchers into danger and give results that are contradictory and confusing at best.
Whatever their origin, gibbering mouthers range the entirety of Golarion.
Sightings have been recorded in dungeons below ancient cities and ruins as well
as many regions of the deeper Darklands layers of Sekamina and Orv. They are
somewhat less common in the upper region of Nar-Voth, perhaps due to the
prevalence of settlements that don’t tolerate gibbering mouthers’ presence.
GIBBERING MOUTHER CREATURE 5
N MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Aklo
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +13
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –3, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 21, All-Around Vision; Fort +15, Ref +12, Will +10
HP 120; Weaknesses bludgeoning 5
Gibbering (auditory, aura, emotion, enchantment, incapacitation, mental, occult) Each
creature that begins its turn within 60 feet of a gibbering mouther must
attempt a DC 19 Will save. On a failure, they are confused for 1 round. On a
success, they are temporarily immune for 1 minute.
All-Around Vision
Reactive Gnaw [reaction] Trigger An adjacent creature deals the gibbering mouther
slashing damage. Effect The gibbering mouther’s wound opens into another maw.
It makes a jaws Strike against the triggering creature.
Speed 10 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +14 (finesse), Damage 2d8+5 piercing plus 1d4 persistent
bleed damage and Grab
Ranged [one-action] spittle +14 (range 30 feet), Damage 4d6 acid and
burn eyes
Burn Eyes A creature that takes damage from a gibbering mouther’s
spittle must succeed at a DC 22 Fortitude save or be dazzled for
1 round (or blinded for 1 round on a critical failure).
Engulf [one-action] DC 22, 3d8 piercing, Escape DC 22, Rupture 8
Ground Manipulation [two-actions] (occult, transmutation) The
gibbering mouther causes stone and earth under
its body to grow soft and muddy, remaining
so for 1 minute after the mouther moves
off the location. A gibbering mouther
can move through these areas with
ease, but other creatures treat them
as difficult terrain.
GIBBERING MOUTHER
LOCATIONS
Gibbering mouthers tend to
remain underground, favoring
subterranean ruins and the lower
layers of the Darklands.
E-G
177

176
GIMMERLING TREASURE
Gimmerlings collect weapons,
traps, mechanical novelties,
and dangerous magic items.
A gimmerling is likely found
with tools (like artisan’s tools,
repair kits, and thieves’ tools)
and items it can use to appear
more vulnerable, such as locks,
manacles, and snare kits (which it
feigns being trapped by).
Gimmerling
Gimmerlings are small, shapeshifting fey who stage ambushes to sate their
endless hunger and childish greed. These cruelly curious fey obsess over finding
and making unusual traps and sadistic weapons, and their favorite amusement is
seeing these traps sprung or the weapons wielded. When on the Material Plane,
they are frequently found in urban areas, particularly slums or other parts of
town where they can either go unnoticed or be easily forgotten-and have plenty
of victims to choose from.
A typical gimmerling disguises itself as an endangered child, doing so in hopes
of drawing creatures close enough to rob. The gimmerling puts itself in apparent
danger using a trap, construct, or bribed ally, or even a coerced monster like
a redcap (page 278).
Because gimmerlings sometimes trade obscure smithing or trapping techniques
in exchange for gifts that sate their curiosity, their greed, or their hunger, they
have at times been worshipped as minor gods of the forge. Some disciplined
gimmerlings work as honored artisans, elite guards, or spies for the demigods
known as the Eldest who dwell in the depths of the First World.
GIMMERLING CREATURE 12
UNCOMMON LE SMALL FEY
Perception +21; hungersense (imprecise) 30 feet, low-light vision
Languages Aklo, Common, Sylvan
Skills Crafting +23, Deception +25, Nature +21, Stealth +25, Thievery +25
Str +4, Dex +7, Con +4, Int +5, Wis +3, Cha +4
Items +1 striking hand crossbow (20 bolts)
Hungersense Hungersense allows the gimmerling to sense creatures
that require food to live.
AC 34; Fort +22, Ref +25, Will +19
HP 235; Weaknesses cold iron 10
Treacherous Aura (aura, primal, transmutation) 15 feet. Tangled
roots, jagged divots, sharp rocks and other hazards appear
on surfaces in the aura, creating difficult terrain.
Trip Up [reaction] Trigger A creature critically fails a melee attack
to hit the gimmerling or moves into a space within the
gimmerling’s treacherous aura. Effect The triggering creature
must attempt a DC 32 Reflex save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is flat-footed until the start of its next turn.
Failure The target takes 2d10 bludgeoning damage and is flat-footed until the
start of its next turn.
Critical Failure As failure, and the target is knocked prone.
Speed 30 feet; trickster’s step
Melee [one-action] claw +26 (agile, finesse), Damage 2d8+7 slashing plus Disarm
Melee [one-action] jaws +26 (finesse), Damage 3d8+7 piercing plus 2d6 poison
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +28 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 2d6+3
piercing plus 2d6 poison
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation) The gimmerling
changes into its natural form or that of any humanoid. In humanoid form, it loses its
treacherous aura, and its equipment appears to be trinkets or toys. As a humanoid
that lacks claws or fangs, it loses the matching Strike. If it loses its claw Strike, it
gains a fist Strike that is identical except that it deals bludgeoning damage.
Disarm [two-actions] Requirement The gimmerling’s last action was a success with a Strike
that has Disarm in its damage entry. Effect The gimmerling knocks a held or carried
weapon to the ground in the target’s space.
Sneak Attack The gimmerling deals 2d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Trickster’s Step The gimmerling ignores difficult terrain and doesn’t trigger traps with
its movement.
GIMMERLING LOCATIONS
Gimmerlings are more common
in the First World than on the
Material Plane and favor hunting
grounds on the verges of dangerous
places where they might encounter
protective creatures to mislead with
their disguises.
E-G
179

178
Gnoll
Gnolls are short, hyena-headed humanoids who dwell in warm grasslands,
savannas, and arid hills. Given their appearance, their affinity for hyenas
should not be surprising; gnolls share their homes, food, and even many of their
own behaviors with these animals. Much like hyenas, gnolls have a notorious
reputation-they are known as bloodthirsty gluttons and slavers who worship
demons or other reprehensible powers. Though these rumors are often true, the
behavior of gnoll clans varies widely. Some groups are composed of capable
hunters who rarely clash with other humanoids unless there is a conflict over
territory. Others hew closer to the unsavory stories, preferring to raid settlements
and enslave innocents, snatching the fruits of others’ hard labor by strength of
arms and forcing their victims to perform the hard, demeaning labor necessary to
maintain the brutal clan.
Gnolls lack any particular reverence for the remains of the dead, which adds
to their reputation as scavengers or even cannibals. They willingly eat nearly any
other creature, including dead gnolls, which can evoke strong reactions from
people and cultures with a strong taboo against cannibalism or desecrating the
dead. To a gnoll, it is almost more offensive to not eat a dead body, no matter its
origin; gnolls see no point in wasting precious meat in a harsh and challenging
world. Worse still is the refusal to eat the flesh of a dead gnoll, which they
consider an insult to that gnoll’s memory and sacrifice and an implication
that the gnoll’s flesh is unworthy of consumption. In fact, they refuse
to eat the bodies of particularly hated foes; particularly warmongering
gnolls even spike the bodies or heads of such despised enemies on tall
spears, which they place around their tribal holdings to dishonor the
dead and intimidate would-be invaders.
Gnoll women are far stronger and more aggressive than gnoll men
and are typically considered the leaders of their hunting packs and
clans. Though gnolls tend to be disorganized when it comes to
practical matters or negotiations, they are extremely efficient at
working together to hunt down prey or overwhelm a group
of foes. Much like hyenas, they prefer to hunt in packs, and
are exceptionally skilled at setting up ambushes or separating
individual targets from larger groups.
Gnoll Hunter
Gnoll hunters serve their clans by hunting for food in
the wilds, marauding along well-traveled roads, and
tracking down escaped slaves.
GNOLL HUNTER CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM GNOLL HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +8, Intimidation +4, Stealth +7, Survival +5
Languages Gnoll
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items battle axe, leather armor, shortbow (20 arrows)
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +7
HP 29
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] battle axe +10 (sweep), Damage 1d8+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (agile), Damage 1d8+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +10 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet), Damage 1d6 piercing
Pack Attack A gnoll hunter deals 1d4 extra damage to any creature
that’s within reach of at least two of the gnoll hunter’s allies.
Rugged Travel A gnoll ignores the first square of difficult
terrain it moves into each time it Steps or Strides.
GNOLL CLANS
The most commonly encountered
gnoll clans are slavers, who travel
far and wide to acquire chattel
and auction off their living goods.
Although not all clans engage in
slavery, most are still violent toward
other creatures in general. Some
clans hunt people for food, others
capture innocents to sacrifice to evil
deities, and still others simply wish
to wet their blades with blood.
E-G
179

178
GNOLL LAIRS
Gnolls dwell primarily on dry
savannas and windswept plains.
Thanks to their sturdy constitutions
and strong survival instincts,
they have few qualms about
setting up holdings out in the
open. Many gnolls establish their
encampments-typically made up of
hide lean-tos and tents-atop sloping
hills to better survey the region for
potential prey. Gnolls rarely dwell
in caverns or similar enclosures,
knowing that it is all too easy to get
cornered when there is only
one exit.
Gnoll Cultist
Gnoll cultists serve as their clans’ spiritual guides and conduits to the divine. As
often as not, their influence drives entire gnoll civilizations to commit atrocious
acts of violence and enslavement. Lamashtu and Rovagug are favored deities of
gnoll cultists, and many gnolls believe their kind was in fact birthed from the
womb of the Mother of Monsters. Some gnoll clans worship lesser-known demon
lords or entire pantheons of sinister patrons.
GNOLL CULTIST CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM GNOLL HUMANOID
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Intimidation +7, Medicine +7, Religion +10, Stealth +7, Survival +8
Languages Abyssal, Common, Gnoll
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +2
Items falchion, hide armor, wooden religious symbol
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +6, Will +10
HP 45
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] falchion +10 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d10+3 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Divine Prepared Spells DC 22, spell attack +10; 2nd darkness, harm (×4),
spiritual weapon; 1st command, fear, magic weapon; Cantrips (2nd) daze,
detect magic, light, read aura, sigil
Pack Attack As gnoll hunter.
Rugged Travel As gnoll hunter.
Gnoll Sergeant
When gnolls band together to form hunting or raiding
parties, the strongest among them is often designated the
leader or sergeant. These gnolls train extensively in the art of
war. Their skill at arms and the respect they command make
them powerful adversaries. In smaller clans or single family
units, a gnoll sergeant might also serve as the group’s leader
in other affairs, such as sorting out domestic disputes or
negotiating with rival gnoll clans.
GNOLL SERGEANT CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM GNOLL HUMANOID
Perception +10; darkvision
Skills Athletics +13, Intimidation +9, Stealth +11, Survival +10
Languages Common, Gnoll
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items composite shortbow (20 arrows), hide armor, scimitar
AC 21; Fort +12, Ref +10, Will +8
HP 60
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +14 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d6+7
slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +14 (agile), Damage 1d6+7 piercing
Ranged [one-action] composite shortbow +12 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range
increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Bark Orders [one-action] (auditory, linguistic) The gnoll sergeant commands its
allies to reposition. Any allies who hear and understand this order can
use a reaction to Step.
Pack Attack As gnoll hunter.
Rugged Travel As gnoll hunter.
E-G
181

180
GOBLIN TREASURE
Although goblin warrens are
generally filthy dumps, they
sometimes contain actual
treasures stolen from longshanks
or other goblin tribes. Typical
treasures include small pieces of
jewelry, shiny items such as hand
mirrors, and gold teeth. As they
rarely trust each other, many
goblins keep their most cherished
baubles on their persons; these,
might include useful weapons or
minor magic items.
Goblin
These small humanoids have green or gray skin and large heads with wide ears.
While some goblins are civilized and have worked hard to be considered upstanding
members of humanoid communities, most are impetuous and vicious creatures who
delight in wreaking havoc. These goblins think nothing of slaughtering livestock,
stealing infants, or burning down a building purely for momentary delight. They
revel in playing malicious tricks on taller humanoids, whom they call “longshanks.”
Goblins are superstitious, with an intense awe of magic and a fascination with
fire; goblins who master magic or fire earn great respect from their kin. Most other
humanoids find it difficult to understand goblins’ outlook: they hate canines but
eagerly share their lairs with so-called “goblin dogs,” they fearlessly attack larger
creatures but are terrified of horses, and they despise vegetables yet consider pickles
a delicacy. To a goblin, of course, these are all perfectly sensible life choices.
Goblin Warrior
The frontline fighters of goblin tribes prefer to fight in large groups-especially
when they can outnumber their foes at least three to one.
GOBLIN WARRIOR CREATURE –1
CE SMALL GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +2; darkvision
Languages Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +2, Nature +1, Stealth +5
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis –1, Cha +1
Items dogslicer, leather armor, shortbow (10 arrows)
AC 16; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 6
Goblin Scuttle [reaction] Trigger A goblin ally ends a move action adjacent
to the warrior. Effect The goblin warrior Steps.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dogslicer +8 (agile, backstabber, finesse), Damage
1d6 slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +8 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60
feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
Goblin Commando
The theoretical leaders of goblin raids are called goblin
commandos. In practice, goblin commandos rarely
continue to lead their comrades once a battle has begun.
Most shirk their responsibilities in favor of wading into
the fray and claiming more glory from their tribe-mates.
GOBLIN COMMANDO CREATURE 1
CE SMALL GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +6, Intimidation +5, Nature +5, Stealth +6
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +0, Cha +2
Items horsechopper, leather armor, shortbow (20 arrows)
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 18
Goblin Scuttle [reaction] As goblin warrior.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] horsechopper +8 (reach 10 feet, trip, versatile P), Damage
1d8+3 slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +8 (deadly 1d10, range increment
60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
GOBLIN LOCATIONS
Goblins construct warrens in
forests and coastal regions,
usually near the settlements
of other humanoids for ease of
scavenging and raiding.
E-G
181

180
THE GOBLIN SONG
The following ditty is perhaps the
most infamous of goblin songs.
Goblins chew and goblins bite,
Goblins cut and goblins fight.
Stab the dog and cut the horse,
Goblins eat and take by force!
Goblins race and goblins jump.
Goblins slash and goblins bump.
Burn the skin and mash the head,
Goblins here and you be dead!
Chase the baby, catch the pup.
Bonk the head to shut it up.
Bones be cracked, flesh be stewed,
We be goblins! You be food!
Goblin Pyro
Some goblins take their people’s admiration of fire fully into the realm of deadly
obsession. These pyromaniacs can be a great boon to a band of goblin raiders
eager to torch their enemies and wreak havoc. More often, however, their presence
is a double-edged sword; in the heat of the moment, goblin pyros sometimes lose
sight of their tribe’s goals and simply set fire to anything that will burn-including
their own allies.
GOBLIN PYRO CREATURE 1
CE SMALL GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +4; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +7, Fire Lore +7, Stealth +7
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis –1, Cha +3
Items torch
AC 17; Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +4
HP 15
Goblin Scuttle [reaction] As goblin warrior.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] torch +7 (fire), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning plus 1 fire
Arcane Spontaneous Spells DC 16, attack +6; 1st (3 slots) burning hands, grease; Cantrips
(1st) light, mage hand, produce flame, tanglefoot
Goblin War Chanter
While all goblins enjoy singing, goblin war chanters pride
themselves on mastering the art of vocal performance.
Their ballads and jingles are undeniably catchy,
though whether they are actually enjoyable is
entirely subjective.
GOBLIN WAR CHANTER CREATURE 1
CE SMALL GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +6, Deception +7, Occultism +4,
Performance +7, Stealth +6
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +0, Cha +4
Items dogslicer, leather armor, shortbow (10 arrows)
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 16
Goblin Scuttle [reaction] As goblin warrior.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dogslicer +8 (agile, backstabber, finesse), Damage 1d6+2
slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +8 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 17, attack +7; 1st (2 slots) bless, soothe; Cantrips
(1st) ghost sound, inspire courage, mage hand, message, telekinetic projectile
Goblin Song [one-action] The war chanter sings annoying goblin songs, distracting
foes with silly and repetitive lyrics. The chanter attempts a Performance
check against the Will DCs of up to two enemies within 30 feet. This has
the usual traits and restrictions for a Performance check.
Critical Success The target takes a –1 status penalty to Perception checks and
Will saves for 1 minute.
Success As critical success, but the target is affected for only 1 round.
Critical Failure The target is temporarily immune to Goblin Song
for 1 hour.
E-G
183

182
GOBLIN DOG STORIES
Goblins adore their goblin dog
pets, and crafting stories about
goblin dog antics is a timehonored pursuit among many
goblin clans. Goblins often seek to
outdo prior stories by increasing
the audacity, ridiculousness,
and surreality of their tales.
Examples of popular goblin dog
tales include goblin dogs holding
fancy dinners in high society
among unwitting humans, goblin
dogs tainting dwarven ale in
unmentionable ways, and goblins
who transform into barghests
as a result of a goblin dog bite.
This last plot, in particular, has
some truth to it, as many credible
accounts point to the existence
of goblin dog werecreatures in
certain goblin tribes.
Goblin Dog
Goblins’ eponymous pets aren’t true canines at all, but rather large, blunt-nosed
rodents with thin bodies and long legs. As cowardly as they are ugly, goblin dogs
prefer to lurk behind bushes or in deep shadows, pouncing upon lone or wounded
prey. Goblin dogs frequently lair and roam in packs, but they are likely to flee
from a fight if injured, even if it means abandoning their pack-mates.
Goblin dogs take their name from their long association with goblins, who
breed the beasts as guard animals and mounts. Most goblins take issue with
the name, as the average goblin is appalled at the suggestion that these, their
favored mounts, have anything at all to do with actual dogs. Of course, being
goblins, they haven’t bothered to come up with their own, unique name for
goblin dogs.
Even the most pampered goblin dogs have itchy mange and prolific dander
that tenaciously affects those who come in contact with them. This “goblin
pox” causes itchy hives and festering sores that are as unsightly as they are
irritating and distracting. Goblin dog dander causes allergic reactions in nearly
all other creatures that don’t share the goblin dogs’ terrible hygiene-with the
notable exception, of course, of goblins, who remain entirely immune to the
disease regardless of cleanliness.
Hunger can drive goblin dogs to bouts of uncharacteristic violence; many
goblins purposefully starve their pets to make them more aggressive in battle.
Goblin dogs subsist on whatever organic material they can scavenge, and they
particularly enjoy fresh carrion. Although goblins are far from picky eaters,
they value goblin dogs as pets because the noisome animals will consume
food that even goblins won’t dare to eat. “Will it eat?” is one of several games
goblins enjoy playing with their goblin dog pets, where a wide range of mouthsized morsels (not always edible or safe to consume) are dangled before a
goblin dog’s snout. “Will it die?” is often a game played after “Will it eat?”
Goblin dogs who survive the second game earn renown for their digestive
prowess and often become favored tribal pets treated better than most of the
rank-and-file goblins.
GOBLIN DOG CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +6, Stealth +7
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 17; Fort +8, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 17
Buck [reaction] DC 17
Irritating Dander A creature that hits the goblin dog
with an unarmed attack, tries to Grapple it, or otherwise
touches it is exposed to goblin pox.
Juke [reaction] Requirement A creature must be mounted on the goblin
dog. Trigger The rider issues a command to the goblin dog. Effect
The goblin dog Steps before following the command.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +9, Damage 1d6+3 piercing plus goblin pox
Goblin Pox (disease); Goblins and goblin dogs are
immune to goblin pox. Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude;
Stage 1 sickened 1 (1 round); Stage 2 sickened 1 and
slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 3 sickened 2 and
can’t reduce its sickened value below 1
(1 day).
Scratch [two-actions] (manipulate) The goblin
dog vigorously scratches itself, exposing
all adjacent creatures to goblin pox. 
E-G
183

182
GREAT GOGITETHS
As deadly as gogiteths are, rumors
persist of even more terrifying
threats known as great gogiteths.
Said to be nearly a hundred feet
across and capable of spawning
their own hordes of gogiteths in
reaction to being attacked, great
gogiteths are also reputed to be
unusually intelligent. The rumors
claim that great gogiteths are
largely content to lurk in their
deep, remote caverns and spend
the ages dreaming of sadism
and violence.
Gogiteth
A gogiteth is a slavering nightmare of teeth, eyes, and hairy spiderlike legs, and
its appearance is invariably seared into the minds of any who witness it. Hives of
these skittering monsters haunt the lowest reaches of the Darklands, competing
with cave worms and other subterranean horrors for food and resources. A
gogiteth is rarely seen alone, as these oversized vermin learned long ago that
the best means of survival is sticking close to others of their own kind. Even the
haughty drow know to seek cover when a gogiteth is spotted, for where there is
one, a swarm is sure to follow.
Gogiteths make a clacking sound as they move about. The joints in their many
legs pop and crack with each movement, though they can suppress this sound
voluntarily so that they can hunt without giving away their presence. The odd
creatures can also make a high-pitched whistling sound that echoes throughout
the caverns where they live. Some Darklands natives report that groups of
gogiteths sometimes join together in eerie, discordant songs.
Gogiteths’ alien anatomies have inspired no shortage of speculative origin
stories. Some believe they are the result of a fleshwarping experiment gone
horribly wrong. Others think they may be related in some way to the Dominion
of the Black-possibly the distant cousins or some strange exile of that alien
entity; according to this mythos, once they made their way to this planet, the
gogiteths crawled into the depths of the earth, shying away from the blazing
sun above.
Gogiteths are a menace to every other denizen of the Darklands. Drow
and duergars in gogiteth-infested regions of Sekamina or Orv frequently
organize hunting parties to eradicate the terrors, even
calling for temporary truces with unlikely allies in times
when a gogiteth presence must be addressed. Since even
an average gogiteth hive can host up to two dozen of the
horrors, missions to eradicate them when they become
established are dangerous quests indeed.
GOGITETH CREATURE 12
CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +21; darkvision
Languages Undercommon (can’t speak)
Skills Acrobatics +19, Athletics +24, Stealth +21, Survival +17
(+24 to Track)
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +1, Cha +0
AC 31; all-around vision; Fort +25, Ref +22, Will +20
HP 250; Resistances poison 10
Skittering Reposition [reaction] (move) Trigger A creature that
starts its move outside the gogiteth’s reach moves into its
reach. Effect The gogiteth moves 10 feet. This does not
trigger reactions.
Speed 40 feet; climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +26, Damage 3d10+12 piercing plus Improved
Grab
Melee [one-action] leg +26 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d6+12 piercing
Carry Off Prey The gogiteth can move at its full Speed while it has a
creature grabbed in its jaws, bringing the grabbed creature along.
Constrict [one-action] 3d6+12 bludgeoning, DC 32
Skittering Assault[two-actions] The gogiteth Strides three times. Once per
Stride, it can attempt a leg Strike against a creature in its
reach at any point during the Stride; it must make each attack
against a different creature, but it doesn’t apply its multiple
attack penalty until after making all its Strikes. If any of the
Strikes result in a critical failure, Skittering Assault ends.
E-G
185

184
FLESH GOLEMS
Few buyers want anything to do
with the remains of a destroyed
flesh golem. An adventurer’s best
bet for profiting off of a flesh
golem body is to disassemble it
piece by piece, extract the few
contraptions of steel and copper
meant to harness electricity, and
sell the parts to tinkerers who ask
few questions.
Golem
Crafted of base materials and then magically animated into a powerful guardian, the
legendary golem is a living construct that mindlessly obeys its creator’s commands-
often continuing to do so for years or even centuries after its creator’s death. There
exist two known methods of animating a golem. The traditional method involves
harvesting and implanting an elemental soul or essence within the newly crafted host
statue, a procedure seen as vile and blasphemous to those who value the sanctity
of the soul; evil or amoral golem crafters tend to prefer this method. The other,
less disreputable technique involves siphoning pure positive energy into the statue
to artificially imitate the creation of a soul. The result does not give the golem a
true soul and is generally a more costly and time-consuming method of creation.
Regardless of the method used, the resulting golem functions the same. A golem’s
unique animating force leaves it susceptible to certain forms of magic, but apart from
these few weaknesses, it is impervious to magic and difficult to damage with weapons.
Golems work best in play as foes to vanquish rather than allies to accompany
player characters on adventures. The process of creating a golem is time-consuming,
expensive, and difficult, and only the most talented spellcasters or artisans can even
hope to accomplish such an undertaking. While certain magical texts-so-called
“golem manuals”-are said to aid golems crafters, for the most part the creation of
a golem should be something left in the hands of the Game Master.
Golems have components that can be harvested as trophies or magical
components; the value depends on the golem in question. Examples of components
that can be harvested from golems are listed in the sidebars.
Golem Antimagic
A golem is immune to spells and magical abilities other
than its own, but each type of golem is affected by a few
types of magic in special ways. These exceptions are
listed in shortened form in the golem’s stat block,
with the full rules appearing here. If an entry
lists multiple types (such as “cold and water”),
either type of spell can affect the golem.
• Harmed By Any magic of this type that
targets the golem causes it to take the listed amount of damage (this damage
has no type) instead of the usual effect. If the golem starts its turn in an area of
magic of this type or is affected by a persistent effect of the appropriate type, it
takes the damage listed in the parenthetical.
• Healed By Any magic of this type that targets the golem makes the golem
lose the slowed condition and gain HP equal to half the damage the spell
would have dealt. If the golem starts its turn in an area of this type of
magic, it gains the HP listed in the parenthetical.
• Slowed By Any magic of this type that targets the golem causes
it to be slowed 1 for 2d6 rounds instead of the usual effect. If the
golem starts its turn in an area of this type of magic, it’s slowed 1
for that round.
• Vulnerable To Each golem is vulnerable to one or more
specific spells, with the effects described in its stat block.
Flesh Golem
Made of odd scraps of skin and muscle, a flesh golem
is a grotesque parody of life. Though it has no mind,
it can still go into a berserk rage when harmed, giving
it a faint semblance of emotion. Flesh golems guard
the laboratories and charnel houses of fleshwarpers
and necromancers who feel no compunctions about
desecrating corpses for their own ends. Though the
first flesh golem is believed to have been a misguided 
E-G
185

184
ALCHEMICAL GOLEMS
When an alchemical golem is
defeated or disabled, if any of its
first four alchemical chambers
(1–4) remain intact, the chamber
can be salvaged and used as a
lesser alchemical bomb of the
corresponding type: acid flask,
frost vial, bottled lightning, or
alchemist's fire, respectively.
attempt to create from simple base elements, these monstrosities are far from
human. In isolated cases, echoes of a personality might rise in a flesh golem if
the brain used as part of its construction belonged to a particularly powerful
personality, but such tragic instances are (thankfully) rare in the extreme.
FLESH GOLEM CREATURE 8
UNCOMMON N LARGE CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +12; darkvision
Skills Athletics +19
Str +5, Dex –1, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 26; Fort +18, Ref +14, Will +15
HP 140; Immunities bleed, disease, death effects, electricity, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed,
poison, sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 5 (except adamantine)
Berserk A severely damaged flesh golem has a chance of going berserk. If it has 40 or
fewer HP at the start of its turn, the golem must succeed at a DC 5 flat check or go
berserk. A berserk golem wildly attacks the nearest living creature, or the nearest
object if no creatures are nearby.
Golem Antimagic harmed by fire (5d8, 3d4 from areas or persistent damage); healed by
electricity (area 2d4 HP); slowed by cold
Vulnerable to Flesh to Stone Casting a flesh to stone spell on the flesh golem affects
the golem normally.
Electric Reflexes [reaction] Trigger The golem takes electricity damage and a creature is
adjacent to it. Effect The golem lashes out and tries to grab a nearby creature. The
golem attempts an Athletics check to Grapple an adjacent creature. The creature
also takes 3d6 electricity damage on a success, or 6d6 electricity damage on a
critical success.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +20 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+7 bludgeoning
Berserk Slam [one-action] Requirement The flesh golem is berserk. Effect The flesh golem Strikes
with its fist at a –1 circumstance penalty. If it hits, it deals 1d6 extra damage and
knocks the target prone.
Alchemical Golem
This golem is a walking alchemical nightmare capable of inflicting all
manner of painful wounds. Its ability to follow orders is granted
by the otherwise mindless humanoid brain that floats in its
dome-like head. In exceptionally rare cases, the brain used
in its creation might retain fragments of memories or
even actual intellect, resulting in an alchemical golem
with a personality and agenda of its own.
ALCHEMICAL GOLEM CREATURE 9
UNCOMMON N LARGE ALCHEMICAL CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +15; darkvision
Skills Athletics +22
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 27; Fort +20, Ref +19, Will +15
HP 150; Immunities acid, bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison,
sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 12 (except adamantine or bludgeoning)
Alchemical Chambers An alchemical golem’s body contains six alchemical chambers filled
with different substances. When an alchemical golem ability calls upon a randomly
determined alchemical effect, roll 1d6 and consult the following (if you roll the result of
a chamber that was shattered, there is no alchemical effect):
1 acid damage; 2 cold damage; 3 electricity damage; 4 fire damage; 5 poison damage;
6 sickness: DC 26 Fortitude save or sickened 1 (sickened 2 on a critical failure)
E-G
187

186
CLAY GOLEMS
The remains of clay golems are
worth more to archaeologists
and scholars than to merchants.
The magnificent treasures
often guarded by these ancient
wardens, however, are another
matter entirely.
Alchemical Rupture When an alchemical golem takes physical damage from a critical hit
or is affected by a shatter spell, one glass chamber within its body shatters, spewing
alchemical liquid in a 5-foot emanation. Roll on the alchemical chambers list (see
above) to determine which one shatters-on a roll of 1–5, creatures in the area take
10d6 damage of the appropriate type (DC 28 basic Reflex). On a roll of 6, creatures
must instead save against the sickness effect.
Golem Antimagic harmed by sonic (5d8, 2d6 from areas or persistent damage); healed
by acid (area 2d4 HP); slowed by cold
Vulnerable to Shatter Casting a shatter spell on an alchemical golem affects the golem
normally, but also causes an alchemical rupture (see above).
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] syringe +22 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+6 piercing plus
alchemical injection
Ranged [one-action] bomb +20 (magical, thrown 20 feet), Damage see Generate Bomb
Alchemical Injection When an alchemical golem hits a creature with a syringe Strike,
roll 1d6 on the alchemical chambers list to determine the additional effect of the
attack. The syringe deals an additional 2d6 damage of the appropriate type (or
exposes the target to the sickness effect, as appropriate).
Generate Bomb [one-action] (manipulate) The golem fills an empty vial from one of its alchemical
chambers to create a bomb and then makes a bomb Strike. Determine the type of bomb
created by rolling 1d6 on the alchemical chambers list above. On a roll of 1–4, it creates
the corresponding greater alchemical bomb: an acid flask from chamber 1, a frost vial
from chamber 2, bottled lightning from chamber 3, or alchemist’s fire from chamber 4.
On a roll of 5, it creates a poisonous bomb that deals 3d10 poison damage and 3 poison
splash damage with no other effects. On a roll of 6, it creates a sickness bomb, which
exposes the target and all creatures in the splash radius to the sickness effect; creatures
hit by only the splash receive a +2 circumstance bonus to their Fortitude saves.
Clay Golem
Traditionally, clay golems are crafted in the image of a deity and used as
guardians of tombs or sacred crypts. Clay golems have the power to lay curses
upon their victims as punishment for intrusion, leading many to believe that
these oft-ancient constructs have a touch of the divine to them. While
this idea has little basis in reality, superstitious folk still tread lightly
around statues that resemble clay golems even in the slightest.
The animating force within a clay golem is unusually unstable,
making the golem prone to entering a berserk frenzy when
damaged. Entire treasuries have been totally ruined as a result of a
rampaging clay golem, so crafters do well to make sure their golems
are maintained and in good working order-or otherwise place them on the other
side of the door from the treasures they wish to protect.
CLAY GOLEM CREATURE 10
UNCOMMON N LARGE CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +16; darkvision
Skills Athletics +24
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +6, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 29; Fort +23, Ref +16, Will +17
HP 175; Immunities acid, bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison,
sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 10 (except adamantine)
Berserk A severely damaged clay golem has a chance of going berserk. If it has 50 or
fewer Hit Points at the start of its turn, the golem must succeed at a DC 5 flat check
or go berserk. A berserk golem wildly attacks the nearest living creature, or
the nearest object if no creatures are nearby.
Golem Antimagic harmed by cold and water (5d10, 2d6 from areas or
persistent damage); healed by acid (area 2d6 HP); slowed by earth
E-G
187

186
STONE GOLEMS
Depending on the material from
which it is made and the care that
went into crafting it, a destroyed
stone golem may be worth as much
as an immaculately sculpted marble
pillar or as little as a pile of rubble.
Vulnerable to Disintegrate A disintegrate spell affects the golem but deals half the
normal amount of damage and causes the golem to become slowed 2 for 1 round.
Quicken [free-action] (divine, transmutation) Frequency Once per day. Trigger The clay golem’s
turn begins. It can’t trigger this free action on the first turn of combat. Effect The clay
golem becomes quickened for 1 minute.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action]fist +24 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+12 bludgeoning plus cursed wound
Berserk Slam [one-action] Requirement The golem is berserk. Effect The clay golem Strikes
with its fist at a –1 circumstance penalty. If its Strike hits, the clay golem deals an
additional 1d8 damage and knocks the target prone.
Cursed Wound (divine, curse, necromancy) A creature hit by the clay golem’s fist must
succeed at a DC 29 Fortitude save or be cursed until healed to its maximum HP. The
cursed creature can’t regain HP except via magic, and anyone casting a spell to heal
the creature must succeed at a DC 29 counteract check or the healing has no effect.
The golem’s counteract level is equal to its creature level.
Stone Golem
Stone golems are slow and steady constructs typically carved from marble or
granite. They’re often made to serve as works of art when at rest, so some golem
crafters employ master sculptors to ensure the constructs make beautiful statues.
Older stone golems might be weathered, with scuffed or cracked surfaces or
missing noses and digits, but this weathering is largely cosmetic and doesn’t
adversely impact the golems’ functionality.
Tales tell of particularly immense stone golems residing in certain
ancient ruins. Survivors from time-lost civilizations bent on carrying out
orders from long-gone masters, these immense stone golems are much
more powerful than most stone golems. They are always level 15 or
higher and never smaller than Huge in size-most are Gargantuan.
Because their size is so great and the structures they dwell in so
dilapidated, the awakening of such a stone golem can cause
surrounding structures to collapse, ancient foundations to
buckle, and ceilings to come crashing down on foes. In
addition to the statistics here, these massive stone golems
attack with wide, sweeping strikes capable of knocking
down multiple targets at once.
STONE GOLEM CREATURE 11
UNCOMMON N LARGE CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +17; darkvision
Skills Athletics +26
Str +7, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 30; Fort +24, Ref +18, Will +19
HP 175; Immunities acid, bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued,
healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed,
poison, sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 10 (except adamantine)
Golem Antimagic harmed by cold and water (5d10, 2d8 from areas and persistent
damage); healed by acid (area 2d8 HP); slowed by earth
Vulnerable to Stone to Flesh A stone to flesh spell negates the golem’s golem antimagic
and its resistance to physical damage for 1 round. A flesh to stone spell reverses this
effect immediately.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +24 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+13 bludgeoning
Impose Paralysis [reaction] (incapacitation) Trigger The stone golem hits a slowed creature.
Effect The creature must succeed at a DC 30 Fortitude save or become paralyzed for
1 round.
Inexorable March [one-action] The stone golem Strides up to its Speed, pushing back each
creature whose space it moves into and damaging them if they try to stop 
E-G
189

188
IRON GOLEMS
An iron golem can be melted down
for scrap or traded to fire giants
for repurposing into armor for a
Large creature.
its movement. A creature can attempt to bar the way by succeeding at a DC 34
Fortitude save. On a critical success, the resisting creature takes no damage;
otherwise it is damaged as if hit by the golem’s fist.
Slowing Pulse [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, transmutation) Each creature in a 10-foot
emanation must succeed at a DC 30 Fortitude save or be slowed 1 for 1 minute. The
golem can’t use Slowing Pulse again for 1d4 rounds.
Iron Golem
Traditionally crafted into the forms of giant suits of armor or powerful animals,
iron golems are products of exquisite artistry and skill. Their articulated joints
and sturdy armored bodies require great care and mathematical precision to craft,
and regular cleaning and oiling ensure they don’t rust over the ages. With proper
care, iron golems can remain in good shape for thousands of years, being
passed down for generations, as long as they aren’t destroyed by meddlesome
adventurers. In addition to their incredible strength, iron golems possess a
potent toxic breath weapon that is often more than enough to dispatch entire
groups of opponents.
IRON GOLEM CREATURE 13
UNCOMMON N LARGE CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +21; darkvision
Skills Athletics +30
Str +8, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
AC 34; Fort +26, Ref +21, Will +22
HP 190; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued, fire,
healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed,
poison, sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 15 (except adamantine)
Golem Antimagic harmed by acid (6d10, 2d8 from areas and persistent
damage); healed by fire (area 2d8 HP); slowed by electricity
Vulnerable to Neutralize Poison Casting neutralize poison on the golem
deactivates its Breath Weapon for 1 minute.
Vulnerable to Rust Magical rusting effects, like a rust monster’s
antennae, affect the iron golem normally.
Speed 20 feet
Melee[one-action]fist +28 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+12 bludgeoning
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, necromancy, poison) The iron golem
exhales poisonous gas in a 10-foot radius centered on the corner of one
of the iron golem’s squares. The gas persists for 1 round. Any creature in
the area (or that later enters the area) is exposed to the iron golem’s poison.
The golem can’t use its Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Inexorable March [one-action] The iron golem Strides up to its Speed, pushing back each
creature whose space it moves into and damaging them if they try to stop its
movement. A creature can attempt to bar the way by succeeding at a DC 37 Fortitude
save. On a critical success, the resisting creature takes no damage; otherwise, it is
damaged as if hit by the golem’s fist.
Iron Golem Poison (poison); Any drained value from this poison is reduced by
1 every hour. Saving Throw DC 33 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4 rounds;
Stage 1 2d6 poison and drained 1 (1 round); Stage 2 4d6 poison and drained 2
(1 round); Stage 3 8d6 poison and drained 3 (1 round).
Adamantine Golem
Crafted from a nigh-indestructible metal of great rarity,
adamantine golems can’t be destroyed except by the most
powerful foes. Crafting an adamantine golem requires a quantity
of adamantine so massive that collecting it usually requires
mounting a mining expedition to a distant planet, the Plane
of Earth, or an Outer Plane.
E-G
189

188
ADAMANTINE GOLEMS
The incredible amount of
adamantine necessary to create
a single adamantine golem is
worth more than many nations’
treasuries. The powerful heart
of an adamantine golem can be
turned into a legendary forge for
blacksmithing.
ADAMANTINE GOLEM CREATURE 18
RARE N HUGE CONSTRUCT GOLEM MINDLESS
Perception +26; darkvision
Skills Athletics +38
Str +9, Dex –1, Con +9, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha -5
AC 42; Fort +33, Ref +27, Will +29
HP 255, repair mode; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained,
fatigued, fire, healing, magic (see below), mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks,
paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious; Resistances physical 20 (except vorpal
adamantine)
Golem Antimagic harmed by acid (9d10, 2d10 from areas or persistent damage);
healed by fire (area 2d10 HP); slowed by electricity
Repair Mode When the adamantine golem is at 0 HP, it isn’t destroyed. Instead,
it enters repair mode, during which it is slowed 1, can’t take reactions, and can
take only the Self-Repair action. Once it has more than 30 HP, it can use any type
of action and can use reactions, though it remains slowed 1 and can’t take any
reactions until the start of its next turn. If a critical hit with an adamantine vorpal
weapon reduces the golem to 0 HP, or if such a weapon hits it while it’s already at
0 HP, then the golem is destroyed.
Vulnerable to Dispelling The golem can be targeted by disjunction and dispel magic.
If targeted by such a spell of 9th level or higher, the golem has its resistance to
physical damage lowered to 15 and is slowed 1 (or slowed 2 if in repair mode) for
1d4 rounds. During this time, if the golem is reduced to 0 HP while
already in repair mode, it is destroyed.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +35 (deadly 3d12, magical, reach 15 feet),
Damage 3d10+17 bludgeoning plus destructive
strike
Destructive Strike On a critical hit, the adamantine
golem’s fist Strike breaks the target’s armor,
if any, in addition to dealing damage to the
target. If the target has a shield raised,
the golem breaks the shield instead.
Inexorable March [one-action] The adamantine
golem Strides up to its Speed,
pushing back each creature
whose space it moves into and
damaging them if they try to
stop its movement. A creature can
try to bar the way by attempting a DC 45
Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage
and its armor takes no damage.
Success The golem halts its movement and
cannot enter the creature’s square.
Failure The resisting creature is damaged
and its armor takes damage as if hit by
the adamantine golem’s fist.
Self-Repair [one-action] (manipulate) The
golem repairs itself, regaining 30
Hit Points.
Vent [one-action] (fire) The golem vents a 30-
foot cone of superheated steam from
its internal forge. This deals 15d6 fire
damage to all creatures in the cone (DC
40 basic Reflex). The golem can't use Vent
again for 1d6 rounds.
E-G
191

190
INFAMOUS
GRAVEKNIGHTS
Several of Golarion’s most
notorious villains are graveknights.
The following examples are
among the world’s most infamous
graveknights at large, and may
inspire or serve as villains in your
own games.
Lictor Shokneir: Once the
Hellknight leader of the notorious
Order of the Crux, Lictor Shokneir
was disgraced when he refused
a royal order to disband his
army of butchers. The other
Hellknights surrounded him
and razed his castle, Citadel
Gheisteno, to the ground. However,
Shokneir’s determination sustains
his now-undead form, and he and
his undead legions have rebuilt the
citadel in all its haunting glory.
The Black Prince: Although the
graveknight known simply as
the Black Prince was redeemed
centuries ago as part of Iomedae’s
11 Acts, it is said that the prince’s
armor remains intact-and that
vile forces conspire to reclaim it.
If the armor is donned by one of
the Black Prince’s descendants,
the Inner Sea will be beset by a
terrible villain indeed.
Graveknight
Graveknights are undead warriors granted unlife by a cursed suit of armor.
Creating Graveknights
You can turn an existing, living creature into a graveknight by completing the
following steps. It’s best to build a graveknight from scratch, but if you don’t have
the time, simply apply the template. A creature should be at least level 5 before
being converted to a graveknight.
Increase the creature’s level by 1 and change its statistics as follows.
• Increase its attack rolls, AC, saving throws, Perception, and skills by 1, its HP
by 5, and its Strike damage by 1.
Graveknight Abilities
A graveknight gains the undead and graveknight traits, and its alignment is usually
adjusted to evil. It loses any abilities that come from it being a living creature and
any traits that represent its life, such as human and humanoid.
Darkvision
Negative Healing
Rejuvenation (divine, necromancy) When a graveknight is destroyed, its armor rebuilds
its body over the course of 1d10 days-or more quickly if the armor is worn by a living
host (see Graveknight Armor, below). If the body is destroyed before then, the process
restarts. A graveknight can only be permanently destroyed by obliterating its armor
(such as with disintegrate), transporting it to the Positive Energy Plane, or throwing it
into the heart of a volcano.
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision, unconscious, plus one
energy type (the same chosen for ruinous weapons below).
Sacrilegious Aura (abjuration, aura, divine, evil) 30 feet. When a creature in the aura
uses a positive spell or ability, the graveknight automatically attempts to counteract
it, with the listed counteract modifier.
Devastating Blast [two-actions] (arcane, evocation) The graveknight unleashes a 30-foot cone of
energy. Creatures in the area take 1d12 damage, plus an additional 1d12 damage for
every two levels the graveknight has (basic Reflex save). The graveknight can use
this ability once every 1d4 rounds. This energy damage is of the same type as that of
its ruinous weapons (see below); Devastating Blast gains the associated energy trait.
Phantom Mount [three-actions] (arcane, conjuration, summon) The graveknight summons a
supernatural mount as per phantom steed, heightened to a level equal to half the
graveknight’s level. Unlike phantom steed, the steed’s AC and saving throw bonuses
are all 4 lower than the graveknight’s, and the steed has one-third the graveknight’s
Hit Points (rounded down). If the steed is destroyed, the graveknight must wait 1 hour
before using this ability again.
Ruinous Weapons At the time of its creation, a graveknight chooses one of the following
energy types that was relevant to its life or death: acid, cold, electricity, or fire. Any
weapon the graveknight wields gains the effects of the caustic, frost, shock, or flaming
weapon rune, respectively, in addition to a +1 striking weapon rune. If the graveknight
is 14th level or higher, its weapons instead gain the effects of the greater versions of
both of these runes.
Weapon Master The graveknight has access to the critical specialization effects of any
weapons it wields.
Alternate Graveknight Abilities
Although the abilities listed above are standard for a graveknight, you can create a
more unusual graveknight by substituting one of the aforementioned abilities (except
for its rejuvenation ability) with one of the following.
Betrayed Revivification The graveknight died after being deeply betrayed. Instead
of being immune to a type of energy damage, it is immune to mental damage, its
weapons deal 1d6 additional mental damage, and its Devastating Blast deals mental
damage with a Will saving throw instead of Reflex.
E-G
191

190
Create Grave Squire The graveknight can gift a piece of its armor to a willing ally, which
becomes its grave squire. The graveknight can communicate telepathically with its
squire at any distance, see through the squire’s senses, and cast suggestion as a divine
innate spell through the telepathic link at will; the squire treats its degree of success
as one step worse. If the graveknight’s main armor is destroyed, the squire’s piece
expands to cover the squire’s body over 1d10 days, after which point it becomes the
graveknight’s new body. The graveknight can have only one squire at a time, and
must recover the gifted piece of armor if it wishes to create a new squire.
Dark Deliverance The graveknight has positive resistance equal to its level.
Graveknight Armor
Wearing graveknight armor is very risky, for the graveknight’s
essence rapidly parasitizes the new wearer, accelerating the
graveknight’s rejuvenation. This agonizing transformation inevitably kills the
host, transforming their flesh into the graveknight’s new body. Removing the
curse allows a character to remove the armor, but if it ever wears the armor
again, the curse returns. If the wearer dies from another cause while
wearing the armor, or if the graveknight’s rejuvenation
completes before the wearer dies from the curse, the wearer
immediately progresses to stage 3.
Graveknight’s Curse (arcane, curse, necromancy) This curse affects anyone
who wears a graveknight’s armor for at least 1 hour. Saving
Throw Will save; Onset 1 hour; Stage 1 doomed 1 and cannot
remove the armor (1 day); Stage 2 doomed 2, hampered
10, and cannot remove the armor (1 day); Stage 3
dies and transforms into the armor’s graveknight.
GRAVEKNIGHT CREATURE 10
LE MEDIUM UNDEAD
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Athletics +23, Intimidation
+22, Religion +19, Warfare Lore +20
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +5
Items composite longbow (20 arrows),
+1 resilient full plate, greatsword
AC 31; Fort +21, Ref +19, Will +18
HP 175, negative healing,
rejuvenation; Immunities cold,
death, disease, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious
Sacrilegious Aura 30 feet. +17
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] frost greatsword +24 (cold,
magical, versatile P), Damage
2d12+10 slashing plus 1d6 cold
Melee [one-action] fist +23 (agile, cold),
Damage 2d6+10 bludgeoning plus 1d6 cold
Ranged [one-action] frost composite longbow +21 (cold, deadly 1d10,
magical, range increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley 30 feet),
Damage 2d8+6 piercing plus 1d6 cold
Devastating Blast[two-actions] (arcane, cold, evocation) 6d12 cold, DC 29
Graveknight’s Curse DC 33
Phantom Mount[three-actions] (arcane, conjuration) HP 58; AC 27, Fort +17, Ref +15, Will +14.
Weapon Master
E-G
193

192
GREMLIN BELLS
Superstitious societies sometimes
hang tiny bells made of
semiprecious metals in the belief
that such bells will dissuade
gremlins from destroying an
affixed object or infesting a home.
Strangely enough, most gremlins
believe this superstition as well,
and even when a gremlin bell
hasn’t been magically enhanced,
a gremlin usually won’t risk
tinkering with objects that seem to
be protected in such a manner.
Gremlin
Gremlins are cruel fey tricksters and saboteurs who have fully acclimated to life
on the Material Plane, finding distinct niches for their inventive destructiveness.
All gremlins delight in ruining or breaking things, whether it’s something physical
like a device or vehicle or something intangible such as an alliance or relationship.
A gremlin’s greatest joy is watching the collapse of complex creations, preferably
after the lightest and slightest, carefully targeted push from the gremlin. Gremlins
tend to denigrate, bully, or even slaughter their lesser kin, particularly mitflits,
whom gremlins (and many others) derisively call “mites.”
Mitflit
Mitflits, also known as mites, are self-loathing and pitiful cowards, easily bullied
into servitude by other creatures or even slightly more powerful mitflit leaders.
They tame insects, spiders, and other such creatures to serve as faithful allies.
Mitflits have lost most of their ancestral gremlin magic, leaving these incomplete
beings full of doubt and insecurity. Mitflits find companionship in the other base
creatures of the world, and forge bonds of friendship with vermin, the only other
beings that seem willing to accept them. A social structure, even one in which they
are bullied, partially fills the hole within mitflits’ personalities, and they rarely
rebel or rail out unless their rage hits a breaking point.
MITFLIT CREATURE –1
LE SMALL FEY GREMLIN
Perception +4; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +5, Diplomacy +1 (+7 vs. arthropods), Nature +3, Stealth +5, Thievery +5
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +0, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha –1
Self-Loathing (emotion, mental) A mitflit’s self-loathing makes it easy to influence. It
takes a –4 penalty to its Will DC against checks to Coerce, Demoralize, Make an
Impression, and Request.
Vermin Empathy Mitflits can use Diplomacy to Make an Impression on and Request things
of arthropods (insects, spiders, scorpions, crabs, and similar invertebrate animals). Most
arthropods have a starting attitude of indifferent to mitflits.
Items dart (10), shortsword
AC 15; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 10; Weaknesses cold iron 2
Speed 20 feet; climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +8 (agile, finesse, versatile S),
Damage 1d6–1 piercing
Ranged [one-action] dart +8 (agile, range increment 20 feet,
thrown), Damage 1d4–1 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 16; 2nd speak with animals (at will;
arthropods only); 1st bane; Cantrips (1st) prestidigitation
Vengeful Anger (emotion, mental) As long as it isn’t frightened, a
mitflit gains a +2 status bonus to damage rolls against a creature that
has previously damaged or tormented it.
Pugwampi
Mean, dog-faced, and craven, pugwampis take disproportionate
enjoyment from the accidents and missteps of other creatures-something
that happens often due to the supernatural aura of ill fortune these gremlins
project. They enjoy preparing pranks involving spikes, excrement, pits full of
spiders, and the like. Pugwampis are somewhat deaf and thus often yell
loudly to each other when not hiding. Many pugwampis worship
gnolls as gods and aspire to be more like gnolls, although gnolls
hate pugwampis even more than most creatures do, due to their
sycophantic fawning.
E-G
193

192
GREMLIN “TREASURE”
All gremlins are hoarders, and their
nests are cluttered with objects
both valuable and worthless.
Sorting through a gremlin nest can
reveal unexpected treasures like
pieces of jewelry or minor magic
items, but care must also be taken
to avoid being cut on rusty shards
of metal, picking up cursed items,
or disturbing a hidden nest of
venomous vermin.
PUGWAMPI CREATURE 0
NE TINY FEY GREMLIN
Perception +6 (–2 to hear things); darkvision
Languages Gnoll, Undercommon
Skills Crafting +2, Deception +2, Nature +4, Stealth +5, Thievery +5
Str –3, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –2
Items shortbow (60 arrows), shortsword
AC 16, Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 17; Weaknesses cold iron 2
Unluck Aura (aura, divination, mental, misfortune, primal) 20 feet. Creatures other than
animals, gremlins, and gnolls in the aura become extremely unlucky (DC 16 Will save;
creature must roll this Will save twice and take the worse result). On a successful
save, the creature is temporarily immune to pugwampi unluck auras for 24 hours. On
a failure, the creature must roll twice and take the worse result on all checks as long
as it is within the aura.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +8 (agile, finesse, magical, versatile S), Damage 1d6–3 slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +8 (deadly 1d10, magical, range increment 60 feet, reload 0),
Damage 1d6 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 16; 2nd speak with animals (at will); Cantrips
(1st) prestidigitation
Jinkin
Jinkins are sadistic tinkers who steal and sabotage items and take great
pride in their power to curse precious objects. They hold grudges and
create convoluted plans for revenge whenever they feel slighted, such as
when a creature dares to remove one of their curses. Rarely content to
wreak simple mayhem, jinkins also take immense pleasure in torture and
murder, though they prefer to lead
victims into traps designed to capture
or incapacitate rather than kill outright.
Deep pits are favorites, since victims
who survive the fall face a slow death from
starvation and thirst. Jinkins enjoy gathering
at the edge of pits to mock, tease, and torment.
JINKIN CREATURE 1
CE TINY FEY GREMLIN
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +7, Crafting +5 (+7 traps), Deception +5,
Nature +5, Stealth +7, Thievery +7
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +2
Items shortsword
AC 17; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 19; Weaknesses cold iron 2
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +9 (agile, finesse, magical, versatile S), Damage 1d6–2 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 17; Cantrips (1st) prestidigitation
Sneak Attack The jinkin deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Tinker (curse, primal, transmutation) A group of six jinkins can work together
for an hour to imbue an item with a curse at a range of 60 feet. While this
process is lengthy, it’s also unobtrusive and can be performed while Hiding. Jinkins
prefer to use this ability on magic items. The curse makes the item unreliable (DC
5 flat check or waste any action to Interact with or Activate the item), adds
a bizarre requirement to use the item, or imparts some other curse of a
similar caliber.
E-G
195

194
Griffon
Griffons are regal beasts revered as symbols of freedom and strength in many
cultures. They are physically striking, with the hindquarters of a lion and the
head, wings, and forelimbs of a great bird of prey-typically an eagle, but some
instead bear the features of a hawk, falcon, or even osprey or vulture. In rare
cases, the griffon’s hindquarters may resemble those of a different great cat,
such as a leopard or tiger. The variations seem to conform to the environment
in which the griffon lives-for instance, the especially rare griffons of northern
Avistan have the hindquarters of a Grungir lynx and the upper body of a snowy
owl-though this is not always the case. Some griffons lack wings altogether.
These wingless griffons, known as alces, result from a rare mutation. Among a
clutch of other griffons, the alce is typically considered the runt, so few of these
offshoots survive their fledgling stage. Those alces that do make it to adulthood
tend to be tougher, more violent, and more aloof than most griffons.
Wild griffons rely on their powerful wings to hold them aloft and their keen
eyesight to spy out prey. The speed with which they plunge toward the ground
and grab up their victims is shocking. They may tear open victim’s flesh with
their razor-sharp beaks, but usually just take their prey to a high, secluded
location where they can enjoy their feast without interruptions. On the ground,
they take cover and leap out to ambush prey, then fly off with their prize. The
exception to this is when a griffon is hunting to feed its offspring, in which case
it will almost never purposefully bring a living creature back to its nest for fear
of endangering its chicks.
Skilled animal trainers long ago learned how to raise griffons as mounts
for military forces or powerful individuals. Such mounts are known for their
strength, bravery, and unfailing loyalty. They are among the smartest of animals
and possess a wisdom not normally afforded most animals; it is
thought that a griffon chooses its rider as much as a rider chooses
the griffon. The process of training a griffon to accept and carry
a rider in flight is a long and expensive ordeal. Griffon trainers
charge rich sums for their services, and a ruler who can
boast of owning a stable of griffons is the subject of great
respect and envy.
GRIFFON CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +11; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +12, Survival +9
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –1
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +13, Will +7
HP 60
Speed 25 feet; fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +14 (deadly 1d10), Damage 2d8+4
piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +14 (agile), Damage 2d6+4
piercing
Melee [one-action] wing +14 (reach 10 feet), Damage
2d6+4 bludgeoning
Flying Strafe [two-actions] The griffon Flies
up to its fly Speed and makes two
talon Strikes at any point during that
movement. Each Strike must target a
different creature. The attacks take the normal multiple
attack penalty.
Pounce [one-action] The griffon Strides and makes a talon Strike at the
end of that movement. If the griffon began this action hidden, it
remains hidden until after the attack.
THE FIRST GRIFFONS
The combination of two symbolic
and recognizable predators of
the land and air (the lion and
the eagle) is the result of devout
prayer among ancient cultures to
an equally ancient deity-a now
long-dead god named Curchanus,
who once held domain over the
beasts of the world. These first
griffons were believed to be much
more intelligent and guardians
of the faith, but when Curchanus
was slain by Lamashtu,
the surviving griffons
regressed to little
more than beasts.
E-G
195

194
GRIKKITOG ORIGINS
Grikkitogs are the subject of
countless scary stories told among
denizens of the Plane of Earth,
many of which speculate upon
their origin. Some who remember
the wars between the elemental
lords believe the first grikkitog
was an experiment created to
serve as a weapon for Ayrzul,
the evil Fossilized King of the
Elemental Plane of Earth, but its
hunger and power was so great
that it escaped containment,
infested an earth elemental
warden, and began to spread
throughout the plane.
Grikkitog
Grikkitogs, also known as “hungry earth,” are strange parasites from the Plane
of Earth that infest and possess earth, rock, and stone in order to feed their
endless hunger. A young grikkitog is a formless apparition until it corrupts an
earth elemental host, forming the grikkitog’s core. A grikkitog can then infest
the earth and stone nearby with its voracious essence, forming maws and eyes
all around it. These creatures are particularly dangerous to small creatures that
lair within gaps and holes among rocks, as well as mountain climbers searching
for the perfect handhold.
GRIKKITOG CREATURE 14
NE HUGE ABERRATION EARTH
Perception +29; darkvision, manifold vision, tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Terran
Skills Athletics +28, Deception +27 (+31 to imitate stone), Survival +25
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +5, Cha +5
Implant Core[three-actions] (manipulate) The grikkitog implants its core into an adjacent section
of earth or stone, melding seamlessly and changing its visual appearance to match
the surrounding rock. It’s immobilized but automatically succeeds at its Deception
check to Impersonate the stone around it; creatures actively searching for it can
still attempt Perception checks against its Deception DC as normal. A grikkitog can
release its implantation as a free action, which has the manipulate trait. A grikkitog’s
infestation aura and manifold vision are only active while implanted.
Manifold Vision While its core is implanted, the grikkitog can see through the eyes
it creates throughout the area of its infestation aura, gaining the benefits of allaround vision.
AC 36; Fort +28, Ref +23, Will +24
HP 200, Resistances 10 (except adamantine)
Infestation Aura (aura, earth, occult) 120 feet. While its core is implanted, a
grikkitog infests all earth and stone within 120 feet, as long as there
is a contiguous physical connection between the earth, including
stone objects touching on the ground. This effect spreads even if
the grikkitog does not have line of effect, though it can affect
earth or stone on the surface and exposed to the air only
if at least part of its core is exposed as well. Within the
aura, it can grow maws and eyes everywhere. It can make
jaws attacks against any creature, originating from any
earth or stone in the aura adjacent to that creature.
Determine cover from the origin point of the attack,
not from the grikkitog’s core.
Speed 20 feet; burrow 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +29 (magical), Damage 3d12+14
piercing plus barbed maw
Barbed Maw Upon Striking a creature with
its jaws, the grikkitog can extend its
barbed teeth, immobilizing the target
unless it succeeds at a DC 34 Reflex
save. While immobilized, the victim takes
3d8 persistent bleed damage and the
grikkitog feeds upon its flesh. The creature is
immobilized until the grikkitog ends the effect
as a free action or the target succeeds at a DC
38 check to Escape. The grikkitog can immobilize
any number of creatures with these maws.
Earth Glide The grikkitog can Burrow through dirt and
stone at its full burrow Speed, leaving no tunnels or
signs of its passing.
E-G
197

196
DEAD MAN’S HAND
Decks of cards are a traditional
method used to tell a person’s
fortune, but legends hold that
certain cards or combinations of
unfortunate draws can attract
the attention of the grim reaper.
Specialized fortune-telling decks,
such as the Harrow, might
not feature the visage of the
grim reaper directly, but to the
paranoid, death could lurk in any
unfortunate hand of cards.
Grim Reaper
The Grim Reaper is the unflinching personification of death. Silent as the grave and
as inevitable as time itself, this legendary being hunts down and finishes creatures
that have evaded death for far too long. Sometimes the Grim Reaper comes
without warning, while at others it comes to finish the work that other creatures
could not. The Grim Reaper serves no god, fiend, or aeon. It is both despised
and feared by psychopomps and celestials, but few-if any-dare to stand in its
way. Like some eternal plague, it kills those who try to cure the multiverse of its
presence. It stands alone and holds only its own council, and the pleading and
reasoning of mortals and immortals alike fall on deaf ears once the Grim Reaper
closes on its quarry. Its own reasoning is silent to mortal ears and inscrutable to
the mortal mind, but no matter the reason, the result is unyielding and final.
While some legends hold that the Grim Reaper appears before everyone as
they die, the truth is quite a bit more disturbing. Such vigils in fact lie within the
providence of the psychopomps, a race of immortals charged with the protection
and guidance of mortal souls through the afterlife. The Grim Reaper has little
interest in protecting souls or guiding them. It is instead compelled by sinister
agendas arising within the nighted realm of Abaddon, where the Horsemen of the
Apocalypse rule. Indeed there are many similarities in shape and form between
the Grim Reaper and Charon, the Horseman of Death, but no recorded instance
exists of these two powerful entities working together. Instead, the Grim Reaper
serves as something of a manifestation of Abaddon itself, and in this regard is
believed by some to be an incarnation of the mysterious First Horseman. When
the Grim Reaper comes to a world, it does so not as an angel of mercy, but as a
relentless harvester of life. Those who fall to the Grim Reaper were not destined
to die as much as they were selected, hunted, and murdered.
Perhaps the most frightening legends surrounding the Grim Reaper concern
its nature as a singular entity, for some believe that more than one grim reaper
exists in the Great Beyond. These whispers tell of a cabal of at least nine of
these creatures that stalk reality, culling the living as inexplicable servants of
true entropy. According to the teaching of some death cults, the final goal of the
Grim Reaper is to end the entire cycle of life and death and serve as a silent lord
of an empty universe.
GRIM REAPER CREATURE 21
UNIQUE NE MEDIUM UNDEAD
Perception +41; darkvision, see invisibility, status sight, true seeing
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +43, Athletics +38, Deception +40, Intimidation +43, Religion +39,
Society +36, Stealth +43
Str +8, Dex +10, Con +8, Int +5, Wis +7, Cha +8
Items scythe
Death’s Grace The grim reaper can choose whether or not it counts as undead for effects
that affect undead differently. Even if it does not count as undead, the grim reaper still
never counts as a living creature.
Status Sight The grim reaper automatically knows the Hit Points, conditions, afflictions,
and emotions of all creatures it can see.
AC 47; Fort +37, Ref +41, Will +38; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 320, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Resistances all damage 15
Aura of Misfortune (aura, divination, divine, misfortune) 20 feet. Living creatures in the
aura must roll twice on all d20 rolls and use the lower result.
Negative Healing The grim reaper can choose whether or not it takes positive damage.
Lurking Death [reaction] (teleportation); Trigger A creature within 100 feet makes a ranged
attack or uses an action that has the concentrate, manipulate, or move trait. Effect
The grim reaper teleports to a square adjacent to the triggering creature and makes a
melee Strike against it. If the Strike hits, the grim reaper disrupts the triggering action.
E-G
197

196
GRIM REAPER TREASURE
The grim reaper keeps no treasure,
but sometimes lesser deaths hang
on to strange keepsakes from
those whom they have slain-
especially in cases where a lesser
death has set its unholy sight on
an extended family or faction.
Speed 50 feet, fly 75 feet
Melee [one-action] keen scythe +40 (agile, deadly 3d10, magical, reach 10 feet, trip), Damage
4d10+23 slashing plus death strike and energy drain
Divine Innate Spells DC 47, attack +37; 10th finger of death (×4); 7th plane shift; Constant
(6th) true seeing; (3rd) haste; (2nd) see invisibility
Death Strike (death) A creature critically hit by any of the grim reaper’s attacks or that
critically fails against any of its spells must succeed at a DC 47 Fortitude save or die.
Energy Drain When the grim reaper hits and deals damage with its scythe, it regains 20 Hit
Points, and the target must succeed at a DC 43 Fortitude save or become doomed 1. If the
target is already doomed, the doomed value increases by 1 (to a maximum of doomed 3).
Final Death A creature killed by the grim reaper can’t be brought back to life by any
means short of divine intervention.
Infuse Weapon (divine, evocation) Any scythe gains the agile trait, can’t be disarmed,
and becomes a +3 major striking keen scythe while the grim reaper wields it. If the
grim reaper Strikes a creature with a weakness to any specific type of damage, the
scythe’s damage counts as that type of damage, in addition to slashing.
Lesser Death
No one is quite sure what lesser deaths are, though some
claim that they are avatars of the grim reaper. Unlike that
strange hunter, however, lesser deaths hunt in packs on
rare occasions. More often than not, they manifest from
cursed magic items. Other times, they are just the enactors
of death, hunting in the same way the grim reaper does-
silently, with neither remorse nor quarter. Rarely, multiple
lesser deaths work together to cull a large population, their
scythes cutting through crowds and leaving entire cities
devoid of life, inspiring (hopefully) false rumors of
multiple grim reapers.
LESSER DEATH CREATURE 16
RARE NE MEDIUM UNDEAD
Perception +32; darkvision, see invisibility,
status sight, true seeing
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +33, Athletics +28, Deception +30,
Intimidation +32, Religion +30, Society +26, Stealth +35
Str +6, Dex +9, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +6, Cha +6
Items scythe
Death’s Grace As grim reaper.
Status Sight As grim reaper.
AC 39; Fort +30, Ref +33, Will +32, +1 status to all saves
vs. magic
HP 255, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease,
paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Aura of Misfortune (aura, divination, divine, misfortune) 20 feet.
As grim reaper.
Negative Healing A lesser death can choose whether or not it takes
positive damage.
Lurking Death [reaction] (teleportation) As grim reaper, except the triggering
creature must be within 60 feet.
Speed 50 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] keen scythe +32 (agile, deadly 2d10, magical, reach 10 feet, trip), Damage
3d10+14 slashing plus 1d12 negative
Divine Innate Spells DC 38; Constant (6th) true seeing; (3rd) haste; (2nd) see invisibility
Infuse Weapon (divine, evocation) Any scythe gains the agile trait, can’t be disarmed,
and becomes a +2 greater striking keen scythe while the lesser death wields it.
E-G
199

198
ELDRITCH GODS
Gugs don’t traditionally make
religion and faith a key part of
their society, but gug cities always
feature prominent temples to
obscure gods whose faith has
passed from view on most mortal
worlds. Most gugs certainly know
of entities such as Azathoth,
Nyarlathotep, and Yog-Sothoth,
but even among gugs, these
Outer Gods are more feared and
respected than prayed to.
Gug
A gug’s most horrid feature is its barrel-shaped head, which splits vertically to
reveal numerous rows of sharp, yellow teeth and an open throat. Its eyes on
either side of its head-jaw are small but keen. Bony ridges protect its eyes from the
frantic flailing of its prey, as it prefers meals of raw and writhing meat over fungi
and molds. It grips said prey with powerful arms that split at the elbow into a pair
of forearms, giving it four clawed paws. These monstrous brutes are covered with
shaggy black fur, often crusted with blood and gore.
Although gugs may seem bestial, they have keen and wicked intellects. Gugs
lair far underground, but they sometimes come to the surface to hunt during dark
nights, either alone or in small groups. As they possess voracious appetites, most
gugs consume the creatures they catch, but some instead kidnap their victims
and retreat below the surface, leaving only a lingering stench and odd, clawed
paw-prints. Victims are taken to rancid lairs marked
with strange runes and sacrificed to the gugs’ wicked
gods of blood, darkness, and nightmares. Dire rumors
tell of lightless gug cities made of titanic blocks of
stone far underground, where powerful gug leaders
preach their vile doctrines to mobs of howling gugs.
Gugs have a strange relationship with ghouls, which
seems to date from their shared origin in a distant subterranean
world. Gugs live in fear of ghouls, despite towering over them;
however, this strange fear doesn’t apply to ghasts, whom gugs
consume as voraciously as they do other creatures.
Gugs stand 16 feet tall and weigh 2,000 pounds,
although they have an eerie, graceful gait that belies
their immense size. Their light step and ability
to squeeze through very small crannies makes
gugs common bogeymen in tales of strange
disappearances or bloody massacres.
Some particularly bloodthirsty gugs gain
awful powers as gifts from their eldritch
patrons. These monsters are known as savants,
are never less than 12th level in power, and gain several occult innate spells.
Though each savant’s precise mix of spells varies, normally, these spells grant
invisibility, offer power to manipulate and change rock, or invoke awful and
destructive energies upon living flesh.
GUG CREATURE 10
CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +19 (+23 to Squeeze), Athletics +23, Stealth +19, Survival +17
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +6, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 30; Fort +22, Ref +17, Will +19
HP 175
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 40 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +23 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+13 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+13 slashing
Eerie Flexibility Despite its size, the gug’s multiple joints allow it to fit through
tight spaces as if it were a Medium creature. While Squeezing, it can move at
its full Speed.
Furious Claws [two-actions] The gug makes up to four claw Strikes, each against a different
target. These attacks all count toward the gug’s multiple attack penalty, but the
penalty doesn’t increase until after the gug makes all its attacks.
Rend [one-action] claw
E-G
199

198
GUTHALLATH SLUMBER
Entire civilizations have been
swept off the face of Golarion due
to the devastating rampage of a
guthallath. But there is a light at
the end of the tunnel, for after
some time the guthallath ends its
massacre in a swift yet seemingly
random way. The colossus then
finds a remote location deep in the
wilderness, where it buries itself,
entering a deep slumber for years-
if not centuries-before awakening
and beginning the destructive cycle
once more.
Guthallath
A guthallath is an enormous construct created long ago by some unknown empire,
probably as a war machine. Nearly 100 feet tall, this massive stone statue typically
resembles a stalwart warrior wearing only a loincloth and skullcap. Few have seen
the entire body of a guthallath, though; most of the time such a relic is buried up to its
neck, covered in moss and stranded in some forgotten place. Yet, every so often, one
of these harbingers of destruction reactivates in response to some unknown stimulus
or rallying call, and when this happens, woe be unto any who stand in its way.
While the guthallath’s ancient enemies are gone, it is an engine of pure destruction,
designed to rampage for weeks or even months. While not intelligent enough to enjoy
or regret its acts, the guthallath cannot be reasoned with-it is unaffected by most
magic, and is unpredictable in how it selects its targets (and creatures it spares).
GUTHALLATH CREATURE 19
RARE N GARGANTUAN CONSTRUCT
Perception +30; darkvision, true seeing
Skills Acrobatics +25, Athletics +40
Str +10, Dex +2, Con +8, Int –4, Wis +0, Cha –1
AC 43; Fort +38, Ref +32, Will +30
HP 325; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued, healing,
magic (see below), necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison, sickened,
unconscious; Resistances physical 15 (except adamantine)
Erosion Aura (aura, primal) 120 feet. The guthallath erodes away the physical integrity
of all around it. Creatures and objects in the emanation other than the guthallath have
their hardness and resistances reduced by 10. At the start of its turn, a creature in the
erosion aura's area takes 6d6 bludgeoning damage (basic Fortitude DC 39).
Immunity to Magic The guthallath is immune to spells of lower than 7th level and the
activated effects of magic items of lower than 14th level.
Speed 40 feet, burrow 50 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +38 (deadly 3d12, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d12+18 bludgeoning plus
Improved Grab or Improved Push 20 feet
Melee [one-action] foot +38 (deadly 3d12, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d8+18 bludgeoning
plus Improved Knockdown
Innate Primal Spells DC 37; Constant (8th) true seeing; (3rd) haste
Annihilation Beams [two-actions] A guthallath releases two beams of destruction from
its eyes. Each beam is a 120-foot line.
Everything in either line takes the
effect of a hit from a 10th-level
disintegrate spell (DC 41 Fortitude).
There is no additional effect on
creatures in any area where the
beams overlap. The guthallath can’t
use this ability again for 1d4 rounds.
Deadly Throw [one-action] Requirements The
guthallath has a creature grabbed.
Effect The guthallath throws the
creature into the air, 100 feet high and
50 feet away. If the flung creature lands on
another creature, the creature it lands on takes
the same amount of bludgeoning damage. The
creature being landed on can attempt a DC 41
basic Reflex save.
Powerful Blows If a guthallath hits with an
attack and rolls a natural 19 on the d20 roll,
the attack is a critical hit. This has no effect if
the 19 would be a failure.
Trample [three-actions] Huge or smaller, foot, DC 45
H-K
201

200
HATERS OF HUMANITY
Hags loathe all humanoid races,
but not equally-the brunt of their
wrath is leveled against humans.
Hags prey on human society the
most, adding human flesh to their
cauldron and snatching newborn
children before replacing the
babes with their own progeny as
changelings (page 62).
Hag
Malevolent crones who lurk at the edges of civilization, hags use their deceptive,
magical abilities to prey upon humanoids, manipulating and corrupting them.
Some say hags arose from fey that became twisted by their inner selfishness.
Hags gather together in covens for greater power, craft unique magical items
known as hag eyes, and are known to replace infant humanoids with their own
offspring-these children are changelings (page 62) who have the potential to
become hags themselves.
Sea Hag
Sea hags kill and eat fishers and sailors who come near their lairs, torment coastal
dwellers with dark promises and vague threats, and enjoy the act of causing
distress and discord in small towns. They generally avoid making their lairs too
close to civilization, however, to avoid drawing enemies to their homes. Sea hags
are known for tempting desperate victims into tragic and inescapable bargains,
deals which the hag has already secretly stacked in her favor. Despite their
voracious appetites, sea hags appear hideously emaciated,
and unlike more powerful hags, they lack the ability
to magically disguise their form.
Sea hags can join covens, but their aquatic nature
often prevents them from joining mixed covens
with other kinds of hags.
SEA HAG CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS HAG HUMANOID
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +11, Deception +10,
Occultism +8, Stealth +8
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +3
Coven A sea hag adds acid arrow, mariner’s curse, and water
walk to her coven’s spells.
Sea Hag’s Bargain (necromancy, occult)
The sea hag can make a bargain with
a willing creature, who must be of
sound mind. The creature gives away
a special or cherished quality-such
as its courage, its beauty, or its voice-in
exchange for a boon or a promise from the sea hag. As long as the sea hag keeps her
end of the bargain, the only way to restore the lost quality is to defeat the sea hag
or make another bargain for its return.
AC 19; Fort +11, Ref +8, Will +10, +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 45; Weaknesses cold iron 3
Speed 25 feet, swim 35 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +12 (agile, magical), Damage 1d10+4 slashing
Dread Gaze [two-actions] (curse, emotion, fear, mental, occult) The hag gazes upon a
creature, afflicting it with intense distress and a gnawing sense of impending
doom, with a result depending on its Will save (DC 20). The target does not
need to be able to see the sea hag.
Critical Success No effect.
Success Frightened 1.
Failure Frightened 1 and slowed 1 for 1 round. If the target was dying, it remains
unconscious for 1 day. At the end of the day, it must attempt a Fortitude save against
the same DC; if it fails, it dies.
Critical Failure Frightened 2 and slowed 1 for 1 minute. If the target was dying, it remains
unconscious for 1 day. At the end of the day, it must attempt a Fortitude save against
the same DC; if it fails, it dies.
H-K
201

200
HAG COVENS
Hags are dangerous enough on
their own, but when they gather in
threes to form covens, they grow
much more powerful. Full rules for
covens appear on page 342.
Green Hag
Green hags hate beauty and purity, so they use disguises and treachery to lure and
murder innocents, corrupt the pure of heart, and shatter the minds and morals of
their victims. Green hags create imaginative schemes to utterly ruin anyone who
crosses them, as well as good or righteous folk whose very existence insults the
hag’s twisted sensibilities. The complicated scandals perpetuated by green hags
involve impersonation, mistaken identity, the seduction and betrayal of loved
ones, or all these things in combination.
GREEN HAG CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM HAG HUMANOID
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common, Jotun; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +11, Deception +10, Nature +8, Occultism +8, Stealth +9
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +4
Coven A green hag adds entangle, outcast’s curse, and wall of thorns to her coven’s spells.
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +11, Will +12, +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 70; Weaknesses cold iron 5
Sound Imitation A green hag who succeeds at a Deception check to Lie can mimic
the sounds of any animal found near her lair. She has a +4 circumstance bonus to
this check.
Speed 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +14 (agile, magical), Damage 1d10+5 slashing plus enfeebling humors
Occult Innate Spells DC 20, attack +14; 2nd invisibility (at will), tree shape
(at will); Cantrips (2nd) acid splash, dancing lights, ghost sound, message;
Constant (5th) tongues; (2nd) water breathing; (1st) pass without trace
Betraying Touch [one-action] The green hag touches a creature that doesn’t
realize the hag is an enemy. The betrayed creature is affected
by the hag’s enfeebling humors and takes a –4 circumstance
penalty to their saving throw against that effect.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation)
The green hag can take on the appearance of any Medium
humanoid woman. This doesn’t change her Speed or
her attack and damage bonuses with her Strikes, but
might change the damage type her Strikes deal (typically
to bludgeoning).
Enfeebling Humors (necromancy, occult) A creature damaged
by a hag’s claw must succeed at a DC 20 Fortitude save or
be enfeebled 1 for 1 day. On a critical failure, or if it gets hit
again and fails its save a second time, it’s enfeebled 2 for 1 day.
Exhale Miasma [two-actions] (necromancy, occult) The green hag exhales
a miasma of green vapors. Each living creature in a 15-foot
cone is affected by her enfeebling humors (attempting a save as
normal). She can’t use Exhale Miasma again for 1d4 rounds.
Annis Hag
Annis hags are brutal torturers and murderers, delighting in the musical
screams and tasty flesh of young creatures and those who are pure of
heart. Annis hags are the most direct of all hags, engaging in physical combat
and using their change shape ability to hunt rather than to infiltrate and betray
humanoids. But an Annis hag takes a grisly trophy from each kill and uses
it to sow discord, sending the trophy to one of her victim’s loved
ones in a way that implicates another family member in the murder.
Also known as iron hags, annis hags have iron-like yet flexible flesh
that resists edged weapons, and their own touch is the same cold iron
that burns the flesh of other hags. This allows them to bully their way to
the leadership of hag covens.
H-K
203

202
THE NATURE OF HAGS
Some believe that hags possess
no true form or body of their
own, but instead manifest from
society’s fear of aging. That no
known male hags exist has also
puzzled scholars, but perhaps
this is but another way in which
hags mock society-by presenting
themselves as awful stereotypes
of elderly women.
ANNIS HAG CREATURE 6
CE LARGE HAG HUMANOID
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +14 (+16 to Grapple), Deception +11, Diplomacy +9,
Intimidation +11, Stealth +14
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +4, Cha +3
Coven An annis hag adds earthbind, passwall, and spellwrack to her coven’s spells.
AC 24; Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +14, +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 85; Resistances physical 5 (except bludgeoning)
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +16 (agile, cold iron, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+6 slashing
plus Grab
Bonds of Iron [two-actions] (attack, conjuration, occult) Once per day, an annis
hag can cause a cage built of cold iron fingernails to spring out of
nothingness at a range of up to 30 feet, attempting an Athletics
check to Grapple against the target’s Fortitude DC; if the target has a
weakness to cold iron, the annis hag gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to this check. Unlike a normal Grapple, the annis hag doesn’t need
to be within reach and can move as she pleases, and a successful
attempt lasts until the creature escapes (DC 24), causing the cage to
crumble into rust. Any creature can attempt to destroy the cage by
attacking it. It has an AC of 19, Hardness 10, and 40 Hit Points.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) The
hag can take on the appearance of any Medium female humanoid. This
doesn’t change her Speed or her attack and damage bonuses with her
Strikes but might change the damage type her Strikes deal (typically to
bludgeoning).
Rend [one-action] claw
Night Hag
Night hags are thieves and merchants of mortal souls.
These foul creatures collect souls in dark gems or
crystalline jars to sell in fiendish markets, and are
themselves empowered by potent magic jewels known
as heartstones. They haunt the Ethereal Plane, where
they prey upon mortals in their dreams, debilitating
them with horrific nightmares as they rest. A night
hag may find a particular target and haunt them
continuously over the course of weeks, slowly and
cruelly breaking down the victim’s will and ability to
resist, until their soul is forfeit.
A night hag is a canny mastermind and soul broker, willing to
consider any deal as long as she is convinced she has the upper hand.
Although a night hag finds it easy to travel the Ethereal Plane and
prey upon helpless souls that can’t fight back, these souls are also the
least desirable to the evil outsiders the night hag bargains with, and
so a night hag gathers allies and minions that allow her to prey on
more potent souls without personally risking herself. Their favored
minions are nightmares, with whom they share a special bond.
Above all, night hags avoid fighting foes that can harry them on the Ethereal
Plane, picking fights only when they are certain they can escape.
NIGHT HAG CREATURE 9
NE MEDIUM FIEND HAG HUMANOID
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Aklo, Celestial, Common, Infernal
H-K
203

202
OTHER HAGS
The four types of hags presented
here are but the most notorious of
their kind. Others-such as the blood
hag, moon hag, storm hag, and
winter hag-plague society in other
regions of the world.
Skills Arcana +18, Deception +18, Diplomacy +18, Intimidation +14, Occultism +20,
Religion +20
Str +5, Dex +4, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +5, Cha +3
Items heartstone
Coven A night hag adds dominate, nightmare, scrying, and spellwrack to her coven’s spells.
Nightmare Rider When a night hag rides a nightmare (page 244), the nightmare also
gains the night hag’s status bonus to saves against magic, and both the hag and rider
benefit when the night hag uses her heartstone’s ethereal jaunt innate spell.
AC 28; Fort +19, Ref +17, Will +18, +2 status to all saves vs. magic, –2 to all saves if the
night hag does not have her heartstone
HP 170; Immunities sleep; Weaknesses cold iron 10; Resistances mental 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +20 (magical), Damage 2d8+8 piercing plus 1d6 evil and
Abyssal plague
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile, magical), Damage 2d10+8 slashing plus 1d6 evil
Occult Innate Spells DC 28; 9th bind soul (at will; from heartstone),
ethereal jaunt (at will; from heartstone); 8th dream council; 5th
nightmare, shadow blast (×2, from heartstone); 3rd dream
message (at will), magic missile (at will); 2nd invisibility
(at will); 1st ray of enfeeblement (at will), sleep (at will);
Constant (3rd) detect magic; (2nd) detect alignment (all
alignments simultaneously)
Abyssal Plague (disease); A creature can’t recover from
drained until abyssal plague is cured. Saving Throw DC 28
Fortitude; Stage 1 Drained 1 (1 day); Stage 2 Drained increases
by 2 (1 day)
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) The night
hag can take on the appearance of any Medium female humanoid. This
doesn’t change her Speed or her attack and damage bonuses with her
Strikes, but might change the damage type her Strikes deal (typically
to bludgeoning).
Dream Haunting (enchantment, occult, mental) If a night hag is
ethereal and hovering over a sleeping chaotic or evil creature,
she can ride the victim’s back until dawn. The creature
endures tormenting dreams as the hag casts nightmare on
it, and is exposed to abyssal plague. Any drained caused
by dream haunting is cumulative. Only an ethereal being
can confront the night hag and stop her dream haunting.
Spell Ambush A creature flat-footed to the night hag takes a
–2 circumstance penalty to checks and DCs to defend against
her spells.
HEARTSTONE ITEM 9
ABJURATION INVESTED OCCULT
Price 600 gp (200 gp when nonmagical)
Usage worn; Bulk -
This gemstone grants its wearer a +2 item bonus
to saving throws.
Each heartstone is powered by the spirit of
a specific night hag. If it’s separated from her for 24 hours (or she’s been dead for 24
hours), it becomes a nonmagical gemstone. A heartstone allows the hag to use additional
occult innate spells: ethereal jaunt (9th level) and bind soul at will, and shadow blast
twice per day.
Activate [one-action] command; Requirement You must be touching the heartstone. Effect
The heartstone attempts to counteract one disease affecting you (counteract level 5,
counteract modifier +18).
Craft Requirements You must be a night hag.
H-K
205

204
HARPY EXILES
Most harpies are cruel and
sadistic, but now and then a harpy
manages to escape from its family
and becomes exposed to the
wider world. Eyes opened, these
harpy exiles are almost always
more mild-mannered,
cleanly, and open
to non-combat
interactions.
Harpy
Harpies are filthy amalgamations of human and bird, resembling feral humans
with wings, talons, and mouths full of sharp teeth. They use captivating songs
to lure creatures in, then murder them while they stand transfixed. They enjoy
causing confusion and fear in their prey before they strike, believing it creates a
savory flavor in the flesh. Harpies can eat most creatures but strongly prefer sapient
prey-humans and elves are their favorite. Although harpies will eat goblins if
sufficiently hungry, they dislike their flavor and avoid eating them if possible. This
doesn’t comfort goblins, of course, who have a particularly strong fear of harpies.
Because their aeries often reek with the gore of their kills and careless spatters
of guano, harpies carry a distinctly vile scent that canny travelers associate with
danger. Harpies who roost close to civilization make better efforts to keep
clean, though these efforts have mixed results.
Harpies live in family groups or larger clans. They
are lightweight despite their size, standing 5 feet tall
and weighing only around 90 pounds. While most use
relatively simple weapons, some harpies take pride in
learning and mastering the use of more complex tools of
war such as swords and slings. Those who master the use of
the bow, in particular, are often regarded as heroes among
their kind and terrors among their victims.
HARPY CREATURE 5
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +13, Deception +13, Intimidation
+11, Performance +14 (+16 singing)
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +4
Items club
AC 22; Fort +9, Ref +15, Will +12
HP 68
Speed 20 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] club +12, Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] talon +15 (agile, finesse), Damage
2d6+4 slashing
Ranged [one-action] club +15 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+4
bludgeoning
Captivating Song [one-action] (auditory, concentrate,
enchantment, incapacitation, mental, primal) The
harpy cries out an eerie, compelling melody. Each
non-harpy creature within a 300-foot aura must attempt
a DC 21 Will save to avoid becoming captivated by the
harpy’s song. The effect lasts for 1 round, but if
the harpy uses this ability again on subsequent
rounds, it extends the duration by 1 round
for all affected creatures. Once a creature
succeeds at any save against Captivating
Song, that creature is temporarily immune
to Captivating Songs for 24 hours.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is fascinated, and it must spend each of its actions to move closer to
the harpy as expediently as possible, while avoiding obvious dangers. If a captivated
creature is adjacent to the harpy, it stays still and doesn’t act. If attacked by the harpy,
the creature is freed from captivation at the end of the harpy’s turn.
Critical Failure As failure, but if attacked by the harpy, the creature can attempt a new
save at the start of its next turn, rather than being freed at the end of the harpy’s turn.
H-K
205

204
HELL HOUND MINIONS
On the Material Plane, these fiends
are sometimes found in the service
of fire-loving monsters such as
fire giants or efreet, as well as
mortals who seek to tame some of
the raw power of Hell. In Cheliax,
Hellknights occasionally call
upon hell hounds to track down
fugitives and traitors.
Hell Hound
Hell hounds are fiendish, extraplanar canines hailing from the pit that can hunt
down quarry and breathe supernatural gouts of flame. They are temperamental
and quick to aggressive behavior.
Hell Hound
A hell hound’s appearance dismisses any doubts as to its infernal origins-flesh
the color of burning pitch, teeth as sharp as any fiend’s pitchfork, and a shroud of
ever-burning hellfire are all trademark features.
HELL HOUND CREATURE 3
LE MEDIUM BEAST FIEND FIRE
Perception +9; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Infernal (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +9, Stealth +8, Survival +9 (+11 to Track)
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 40; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 5
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +13 (magical), Damage 1d8+4 piercing plus 1d6
evil and 1d6 fire
Breath Weapon [one-action] (divine, evocation, fire) The hell hound
breathes flames that deal 4d6 fire damage to all creatures
in a 15-foot cone (DC 19 basic Reflex save). The hell hound
can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds. If the hell
hound would take fire damage or be targeted by a fire effect,
its Breath Weapon recharges.
Nessian Warhound
Believed to be bred by the Prince of Darkness himself within
vast kennels in the infernal realm of Nessus, Nessian
warhounds are the favored guards and hunting hounds of
powerful fiends and, rarely, those mortals who worship
them and have earned their favor.
NESSIAN WARHOUND CREATURE 9
LE LARGE BEAST FIEND FIRE
Perception +19; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 120 feet
Languages Infernal (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +18, Athletics +19, Stealth +18, Survival +20
(+22 to Track)
Str +6, Dex +5, Con +5, Int –2, Wis +4, Cha –2
AC 28; Fort +21, Ref +19, Will +16
HP 150; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 10
Hellish Revenge [reaction] Trigger The Nessian warhound is
critically hit by any Strike. Effect The Nessian warhound’s
Breath Weapon recharges. It can immediately use it as
part of this reaction.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (magical), Damage 2d8+6
piercing plus 1d6 evil and 2d6 fire
Breath Weapon [one-action] (divine, evocation, fire) The
warhound breathes flames that deal 10d6 fire damage to all
creatures in a 15-foot cone (DC 28 basic Reflex save.) The
warhound can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds. If
the Nessian warhound would take fire damage or be targeted
by a fire effect, its Breath Weapon recharges.
H-K
207

206
HOBGOBLINS AND MAGIC
Hobgoblins generally distrust magic,
especially arcane magic, which
they derisively call “elf magic.”
In the absence of magic, they
wholeheartedly embrace alchemy,
combining it with their natural
aptitude for engineering to great
destructive effect. They grudgingly
accept divine magic, due to a
grudging respect for the power of
healing magic in times of war.
Hobgoblin
Hobgoblins may appear to outsiders to be the most civilized of goblinkind, but
their civilization is hardly one of kindness and equality-instead, they revel
in all that is militaristic, tyrannical, cruel, and destructive. Hobgoblins are
singularly devoted to war, and their entire culture is built upon fostering and
maintaining conflict while simultaneously proving their superiority in battle.
Hobgoblins are highly organized, and they work efficiently and effectively in
groups, whether that group is a small raiding party, a roving war band, or
a fully regimented army. Hobgoblin rulers require little provocation before
declaring war, and more often than not, such wars are waged to gain slaves or
territory. Physically, hobgoblins stand about as tall as humans and have gray,
ashen skin.
Hobgoblin society is organized along military lines, and every hobgoblin
is effectively a member of the army. Each hobgoblin in a community has a
rank in the military hierarchy, and individuals are naturally ambitious and
obsessed with advancement. Hobgoblins are constantly expected to prove that
they’re fearless, ruthless, cunning, and strong. Demonstrating such aptitudes
is an individual hobgoblin’s best hope for promotion through the ranks, but
failure leads only to cruel exploitation at the hands of their superiors. Though
brutal, hobgoblin society is a true meritocracy, and all hobgoblins, regardless
of age, gender, or birth, wield authority and earn respect from their peers
based on their skill in battle. Even those individuals who serve in non-combat
roles in hobgoblin society-blacksmiths, builders, cooks, messengers,
quartermasters, and the like-know that they perform vital jobs that
support the larger hobgoblin army, though they rarely rise above the
rank of common soldier. Everyone contributes to the larger
whole, ensuring that hobgoblin society is the strongest and
most efficient it can be, and anyone who fails to do so
is culled from the army and this hobgoblin society as
dead weight. Hobgoblins don’t usually engage in trade
with other races, or even with other hobgoblin tribes,
preferring to take what they want by force.
Hobgoblin Soldier
Soldiers make up the bulk of hobgoblin society,
whether that society is a village or a military unit.
HOBGOBLIN SOLDIER CREATURE 1
LE MEDIUM GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Athletics +6, Stealth +6
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –1
Items hide armor, longsword, shortbow (10 arrows), wooden
shield (Hardness 3, HP 12, BT 6)
AC 18 (20 with shield raised); Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +5
HP 20
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Shield Block [reaction]
Formation When it’s adjacent to at least two other allies, the
hobgoblin soldier gains a +1 circumstance bonus to AC
and saving throws. This bonus increases to +2 to Reflex
saves against area effects.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] longsword +8 (versatile P), Damage 1d8+3 slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +8 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60
feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
H-K
207

206
LIVING WITH HOBGOBLINS
With few exceptions, the only
non-goblinoids in a hobgoblin
settlement or army are slaves
(or at least regarded as such).
Hobgoblins occasionally make use
of bugbears as assassins or spies,
and most hobgoblin tribes include
a small group of goblins who eke
out a meager existence on the
fringes of hobgoblin society.
Hobgoblin Archer
Bands of hobgoblin soldiers typically have at least one archer among their ranks.
In smaller groups, the hobgoblin archer also serves as that band’s captain.
HOBGOBLIN ARCHER CREATURE 4
LE MEDIUM GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +8, Stealth +10
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –1
Items crossbow (20 bolts), scale mail, shortsword
AC 23; Fort +10, Ref +12, Will +8
HP 50
Formation As hobgoblin soldier.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +12 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] crossbow +14 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8+2 piercing
plus crossbow precision
Crossbow Precision The first time the archer hits with a crossbow attack in a
round, it deals 1d8 extra precision damage.
Perfect Aim The hobgoblin archer ignores the concealed condition. Their
targets don’t benefit from lesser cover, and they reduce the AC bonus from
standard cover by 2 against the hobgoblin archer’s attack.
Running Reload [one-action] The archer Strides, Steps, or Sneaks, then Interacts
to reload.
Hobgoblin General
Hobgoblin generals serve as leaders of entire armies and rulers of hobgoblin
settlements. A general does not permit the luxuries of rule to soften them. They
lead their forces on the field of battle and view this opportunity to excel in a
fight at the head of an army as the true reward for a life spent honing one’s skills
in battle.
HOBGOBLIN GENERAL CREATURE 6
LE MEDIUM GOBLIN HUMANOID
Perception +13; darkvision
Languages Common, Goblin
Skills Acrobatics +12, Athletics +15, Intimidation +14, Stealth +12
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items composite shortbow (20 arrows), +1 glaive, half plate
General’s Cry When a hobgoblin general rolls initiative, as long as they
can perceive at least one foe, they can yell a mighty battle cry. The
hobgoblin general attempts an Intimidate check to Demoralize
a single foe within 60 feet as a free action. If successful, any
ally with the goblin trait can, as its first action on its first
turn of the combat, Stride up to double its speed as a
single action.
AC 25; Fort +12, Ref +15, Will +13
HP 90
Formation As hobgoblin soldier.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] glaive +17 (deadly 1d8, forceful, reach),
Damage 1d8+10 slashing
Ranged [one-action] composite shortbow +15 (brutal, deadly 1d10, propulsive, range increment
60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Polearm Critical Specialization On a critical hit, the target of the critical hit is moved
5 feet in a direction of the hobgoblin general’s choice.
H-K
209

208
SOULBOUND HOMUNCULI
Most homunculi use a dose of
their creator’s blood as their spark
of life, but it’s possible to use a
technique similar to that used in
the crafting of a soulbound doll
(page 306) to give a homunculus
a personality and the semblance
of life. These homunculi gain the
soulbound trait, can speak, and do
not have a special link to a creator,
yet the process tends to warp
the soul used so that, more often
than not, what rises in the new
homunculus body is a parody of
its prior life. As such, soulbound
homunculi are generally created by
cruel spellcasters as a method
of humiliating and tormenting
vanquished enemies.
Homunculus
A homunculus is a tiny servitor construct created by a crafter to serve as a spy,
scout, messenger, or assistant. When a crafter first begins to study the art of
creating constructs, she often crafts a homunculus first, since the creation process
is simple and inexpensive due to a magical shortcut: the use of the creator’s own
blood. This forges a link between the homunculus and its master, causing the
homunculus to gain a spark of the creator’s intellect, as well as the same moral
values and some of the creator’s basic personality traits. Homunculi left to their
own devices never stray far from their masters.
In most cases, a homunculus doesn’t survive the death of its master for long.
Deprived of its creator, a homunculus loses focus and grows increasingly
self-destructive, and some even end up battering themselves to destruction. Rarely,
a homunculus with a slain master survives the trauma with its mind intact, often
seeing itself as its deceased creator’s child or successor and attempting to further
its creator’s legacy as best it can. In such cases, and if the
homunculus was in close proximity to its master upon that
creature’s death, a portion of the dead master’s soul “infects” the
surviving homunculus as it passes on to the afterlife. This doesn’t result
in a truly soulbound homunculus (see sidebar), since only a fragment of
the soul is left behind, but this is still enough to grant the homunculus a
greater personality, free will of its own, and perhaps most importantly, the
ability to speak. Over time, a few of these “awakened” homunculi even go
so far as to become convinced that they are the reincarnation of their prior
masters, although their actual personalities never quite reach the depth and
complexity of a truly living creature. They are, at best, caricatures of the master,
and at worst they become awful, bitter-minded parodies of life itself. Still, a
free-willed homunculus might pursue studies in its creator’s class, becoming
a unique creature with the abilities of that class if time and fortune permit.
Homunculi are created from a mixture of clay, ash, mandrake root,
spring water, and a pint of the creator’s own blood. It is possible
for a separate donor to provide the blood, but the process is
more difficult.
HOMUNCULUS CREATURE 0
N TINY CONSTRUCT
Perception +3; darkvision
Languages Common (can’t speak any language); master
link
Skills Acrobatics +5, Stealth +5
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha –2
Master Link (arcane, divination, mental) A homunculus can’t speak, but it
is telepathically linked to its creator. It can share information back and
forth, including its master’s knowledge and everything the homunculus
hears. The range of this link is 1,500 feet. The homunculus adopts the
same alignment as its creator and is utterly faithful. If the homunculus
is destroyed, the master takes 2d10 mental damage. If the master is slain,
the homunculus becomes mindless, claims its current location as its lair, and
instinctively attacks anyone who comes near.
AC 17; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 17; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained, fatigued, healing,
necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed, poison, sickened, unconscious
Speed 15 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +7 (finesse, magical), Damage 1d4 piercing plus homunculus poison
Homunculus Poison (poison); A homunculus has one dose of poison in a reservoir in its
head. It can refill this poison from its reserves with an Interact action. Saving Throw
DC 15 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison and enfeebled 1
(1 round)
H-K
209

208
GOBLINS AND HORSES
Goblins have many superstitions
and quirks, but few of them are
stronger than their fear and
hatred of horses. This isn’t a
one-sided affair. Horses also fear
and hate goblins, and some have
been known to go out of their
way to harm a goblin. A goblin
trying to mount a horse is nearly
always subject to a torrent of
violent bucking, as the horse
does everything in its power to
fling the goblin to the ground and
within reach of its hooves.
Horse
Horses serve as mounts and beasts of burden in many societies. They are
loyal and typically gentle creatures, and they are invaluable to those looking
to travel long distances. Smaller folk, like gnomes and halflings, often utilize
ponies as mounts, while horses are the favored steeds for humans and other
Medium humanoids. Most horses that the average humanoid encounters are
domesticated, though large herds of these powerful animals can be found in
the wild.
RIDING PONY CREATURE 0
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +4; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +4, Athletics +7
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 14; Fort +7, Ref +4, Will +4
HP 16
Buck [reaction] DC 15
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +5, Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Gallop [two-actions] The riding pony Strides twice. It has a +10-foot circumstance bonus to its
Speed during these Strides.
RIDING HORSE CREATURE 1
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +5; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +7
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 16; Fort +9, Ref +6, Will +5
HP 22
Buck [reaction] DC 16
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +7, Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Gallop[two-actions]As riding pony.
WAR PONY CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +5; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +7
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 16; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 20
Buck [reaction] DC 16
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +7, Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Gallop[two-actions] As riding pony.
WAR HORSE CREATURE 2
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +11
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 17; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +6
HP 36
Buck [reaction] DC 17
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +9, Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Gallop[two-actions] As riding pony.
H-K
211

210
Hydra
Hydras are multiheaded, foul-tempered serpentine beasts with voracious appetites,
widely feared for their regeneration abilities.
HYDRA CREATURE 6
N HUGE BEAST
Perception +17; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Athletics +17, Stealth +12 (+15 in water)
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +5, Int –3, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 23; all-around vision; Fort +15, Ref +12, Will +10
HP (body) 90, hydra regeneration
HP (head) 15, head regrowth; Immunities area damage; Weaknesses slashing 5
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Head Regrowth A hydra ordinarily has five heads. A creature can attempt to sever one of
the hydra’s heads by specifically targeting it and dealing damage equal to the head’s
Hit Points. A head that is not completely severed returns to full Hit Points at the end
of any creature’s turn.
A hydra can regrow a severed head using Hydra Regeneration. A creature can prevent
this regrowth by dealing acid or fire damage to the stump, cauterizing it. Single-target
acid or fire effects need to be targeted at a specific stump, but effects that deal splash
damage or affect areas covering the hydra’s whole space cauterize all stumps if they
deal acid or fire damage. If the attack that severs a head deals any acid or fire damage,
the stump is cauterized instantly. If all five heads are cauterized, the hydra dies.
Hydra Regeneration The hydra has regeneration equal to 3 × the number of heads it has. If
a hydra’s body is missing any heads and the remaining stumps have not been cauterized,
the hydra attempts a DC 25 Fortitude save after it regains Hit Points from regeneration.
On a success, one uncauterized stump regrows two heads; on a critical success, two
uncauterized stumps regrow into two heads each. The hydra can never grow more
than double the number of heads it ordinarily has. The hydra’s regeneration only fully
deactivates if all its heads are severed and all stumps are cauterized, at which point it dies.
Multiple Opportunities A hydra gains an extra reaction per round for each of its heads
beyond the first, which it can use only to make Attacks of Opportunity. It can’t use
more than 1 reaction on the same triggering action, even if a creature leaves several
squares within its reach, and the hydra must use a different head for
each Attack of Opportunity it makes. Whenever one of the
hydra’s heads is severed, the hydra loses 1
of its extra reactions per round.
Speed 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage
2d6+7 piercing
Focused Assault [two-actions] The hydra
attacks a single target with its heads,
overwhelming its foe with multiple
attacks and leaving almost nowhere to
dodge. The hydra Strikes with its fangs.
On a successful attack, the hydra deals damage from its
fangs Strike to the target, plus an additional 1d6 damage
for every head it has beyond the first. Even on a failed
attack, the hydra deals the damage from one fangs Strike
to the target creature, though it still misses completely on
a critical failure. This counts toward the hydra’s multiple
attack penalty as a number of attacks equal to the number of
heads the hydra has.
Storm of Jaws [two-actions] The hydra makes a number of Strikes up to
its number of heads, each against a different target. These attacks
count toward the hydra’s multiple attack penalty, but the multiple attack penalty
doesn’t increase until after the hydra makes all its attacks.
VARIANT HYDRAS
Scholars of bestial lore can
describe several hydra variations.
Though rare, hydras with more
than five heads live in very
isolated areas, sometimes guarding
incredibly powerful artifacts.
Explorers who have visited colder
swamps and frozen glaciers tell
tales of hydras with blue-tinged
scales that are immune to the
cold and can exhale clouds of icy
death. Similar stories describe
fiery hydras that breathe gouts of
flame and swim in the molten lava
of active volcanoes.
H-K
211

210
HYENA LEGENDS
The hyena’s intense cunning,
combined with its unnerving
laughter, has caused hyenas to
become associated with all manner
of evil-hyenas are claimed to rob
graves, steal children, and wield
sinister supernatural powers.
Though normal hyenas are no
more malicious than any other
natural predator, their unearned
reputation often causes witches,
warlords, and ill-natured creatures
to seek out hyenas as pets or
guard animals. The fact that
gnolls in particular have a special
preference for hyenas, considering
the animals to be close relatives,
does little to improve the animal’s
already-poor reputation.
Hyena
Hyenas are pack-hunting scavengers known for their unnerving, laughter-like
cries, and they aren’t above supplementing their carrion diets with fresh prey.
Hyena
Hyenas are cunning, powerfully built carnivores that bear a heavy resemblance
to dogs and other canines, though they are not themselves canines. Though all
hyenas are often maligned as cowardly carrion eaters, their tactics depend on
their specific breed: spotted hyenas are active pack hunters that kill most of
their prey themselves, while striped and brown hyenas are more likely to be
scavengers. Their jaws are exceptionally powerful, allowing hyenas to seize a
victim and pull it to the rest of the pack.
HYENA CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +7, Stealth +6
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 16; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +4
HP 20
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +8, Damage 1d8+3 piercing plus Knockdown
Drag [one-action] The hyena makes a jaws Strike against a prone enemy. If it hits, in addition to
dealing damage, the hyena Strides up to 10 feet, dragging the enemy along.
Pack Attack The hyena deals an extra 1d4 damage to any creature that’s within reach of
at least two of the hyena’s allies.
Hyaenodon
Hyaenodons are the ferocious
primeval cousins of the smaller hyena.
Looming, shaggy-furred creatures
nearly the size of a horse, hyaenodons
are truly formidable predators to be
reckoned with, due both to their
size and to their bone-crushing
jaws. Gnoll clans find these
creatures particularly useful as
mounts and guardians.
HYAENODON CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +9; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +12, Stealth +8
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +7
HP 45
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +12, Damage 1d10+5
piercing plus Knockdown and
bonecrunching bite
Bonecrunching Bite A creature
that is critically hit by a
hyaenodon must succeed at a DC 20 Fortitude save or become wounded 1 as the
creature’s bones or cartilage are crushed by the beast’s jaws.
Drag [one-action] As hyena.
Pack Attack The hyaenodon deals an extra 1d6 damage to any
creature within reach of at least two of the hyaenodon’s allies.
H-K
213

212
“WE ARE DRAGONS!”
Kobolds consider themselves
scions of dragonkind, and they
are extremely proud of this
purported heritage, no matter
how laughable other creatures
might consider these claims.
Despite such skepticism, kobolds
share more than a superficial
resemblance to true dragons, with
scale colorations closely matching
the colors seen among chromatic
dragonkind. Some kobolds
develop a strong propensity
toward powerful draconic magic
and manifest these chromatic
traits with more intensity. These
so-called dragon mages are highly
respected by other kobolds, and
often rise to leadership positions
within the tribe.
Kobold
Kobolds are small, reptilian humanoids who carry physical similarities to true
dragons. They lurk in dark spaces, usually tunnels and mines beneath the earth, in
either warrens of their own design or complexes discovered and colonized after
the original builders have moved on. Though kobolds are far more pragmatic
than they are courageous, they use every inch of their cunning to even the playing
field between themselves and other, stronger creatures. They attack from the
darkness and at range, and kobold artificers and engineers master the art of
simple but effective traps, which they use to protect their lairs. Kobolds are skilled
at working together by necessity, and they often set up ambushes or hit-and-run
assaults that allow them to do the most damage possible without being harmed
in return.
Kobolds are diligent and hardworking creatures, though they often turn these
virtues toward selfish ends. While some kobolds live in communal collectives that
maintain neutral relations with the creatures around them, they can be easily
swayed into serving malevolent powers or megalomaniac leaders. This is in part
due to kobolds’ innate pragmatism, as they would rather concede to servitude
than risk being killed, but it is also in part due to a reverence for the power that
kobolds generally lack. Dragons in particular are viewed with a deferential awe,
and kobolds eagerly offer their services to such mighty and glorious creatures
when they can. While kobolds may scheme against other leaders, especially those
that control them via subjugation, dragons are usually viewed with adoration, no
matter how brutal they might be to their kobold minions.
Kobold Warrior
The typical kobold trains with agile weaponry, favoring the light pick for
its use in crafting new tunnels to expand their domains through
underground reaches. Kobolds are capable of landing
sneaky strikes against unsuspecting foes but are just as
quick to scamper off to safety when they don’t, as a
group, outnumber their enemies at least two to one.
KOBOLD WARRIOR CREATURE –1
LE SMALL HUMANOID KOBOLD
Perception +3;
darkvision
Languages Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +5, Craft
+2 (+4 traps), Stealth +5
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +1,
Cha –1
Items leather armor, sling (20 bullets), spear
AC 16; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] spear +3, Damage 1d6+1 piercing
Ranged [one-action] sling +5 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet,
reload 1), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] spear +5 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+1 piercing
Hurried Retreat [one-action] Requirements The kobold warrior
is adjacent to at least one enemy. Effect The kobold
warrior Strides up to its Speed plus 5 feet and gains a
+2 circumstance bonus to AC against reactions triggered
by this movement. It must end this movement in a space
that’s not adjacent to any enemy.
Sneak Attack The kobold warrior deals an extra 1d4
precision damage to flat-footed creatures. 
H-K
213

212
DIABOLIC KOBOLDS
Certain kobold tribes eschew any
concept of draconic lineage entirely
and instead place their faith in the
archdevils of Hell. These diabolist
kobolds view those of their kind
who simper at the feet of dragons
as pathetic wretches. That they
perform the same fearful worship
to their chosen devil does not strike
these infernally minded kobolds as
an irony at all.
Kobold Scout
Most kobolds encountered outside of a well-defended warren or lair are kobold
scouts, creatures trained for stalking and the hunt.
KOBOLD SCOUT CREATURE 1
LE SMALL HUMANOID KOBOLD
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Acrobatics +7, Crafting +3 (+5 traps), Nature +6, Stealth +7, Survival +6
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items crossbow (20 bolts), leather armor, shortsword, snare kit
AC 18; Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 16
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +9 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6 piercing
Ranged [one-action] crossbow +9 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing
Hurried Retreat [one-action] As kobold warrior.
Sneak Attack The kobold scout deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.
Kobold Dragon Mage
Kobold dragon mages use magic to carry out their secret schemes. The
presence of a dragon mage in a kobold warren is one of the greatest
testaments to the kobolds’ claim to draconic heritage.
KOBOLD DRAGON MAGE CREATURE 2
LE SMALL HUMANOID KOBOLD
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Common, Draconic
Skills Arcana +6, Dragon Lore +10, Deception +8, Diplomacy
+8, Intimidation +8, Stealth +7
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +4
Items staff
AC 17; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +7
HP 25; Resistances poison 5 (see dragonscaled)
Dragonscaled A kobold dragon mage’s resistance depends on the color of
its scales: Black acid 5, Blue electricity 5, Green poison 5, Red fire 5,
White cold 5.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +7 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6–1 slashing
Melee [one-action] staff +3 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning
Arcane Spontaneous Spells DC 20; 1st (4 slots) fear, illusory
object, magic missile; Cantrips (1st) detect magic, electric arc,
ghost sound, mage hand, tanglefoot
Illusory Retreat [three-actions] (arcane, illusion, manipulate, move);
Frequency once per hour; Requirements The kobold
dragon mage is adjacent to at least one enemy. Effect
The dragon mage creates an illusion of itself in its
square and then becomes invisible (with
the effects of a 2nd-level invisibility
spell) for 1d4 rounds. The dragon mage
can move up to half its Speed, but it
must end its movement in a space that’s not
adjacent to any enemies. This is a 1st-level spell that requires a
somatic component.
Sneak Attack The dragon mage deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.
H-K
215

214
KRAKEN TREASURE
A kraken’s hoard includes the
plunder of ships lost at sea and
the wealth of sunken cities.
Virtually anything could be
found in a kraken lair, but they
especially covet scrolls, spell
books, and other tomes of ancient
lore, as well as gemstones and
rarefied raw materials found only
in the ocean depths.
Kraken
A kraken is an enormous, squid-like leviathan with a cruel intelligence. It hunts
ships, whales, and heroes alike. The hatred and envy krakens hold for their rivals,
the alghollthus, has led many krakens to make their lairs in sunken cities, where
they can sift through ancient lore for long-lost arcane secrets.
KRAKEN CREATURE 18
UNCOMMON NE GARGANTUAN AQUATIC BEAST
Perception +34; darkvision
Languages Aquan, Common
Skills Athletics +38, Intimidation +32, Nature +35, Stealth +33
Str +9, Dex +4, Con +9, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +5
AC 42; Fort +35, Ref +28, Will +32
HP 360; Immunities controlled, emotion; Resistances cold 10, poison 20
Altered Weather (aura, evocation, primal) A kraken reshapes the weather within 2
miles of it, with the effect of the control weather ritual centered on the kraken and
based on its emotional state, at the GM’s discretion. If the kraken dies, the weather
returns to normal immediately.
Speed 10 feet, swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] arm +37 (reach 40 feet, magical), Damage 4d10+17 bludgeoning plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tentacle +37 (reach 60 feet, agile, magical), Damage 3d10+17 bludgeoning
plus Grab
Melee [one-action] beak +37 (reach 20 feet, magical), Damage 3d10+17 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 40; 10th dominate (animals only); 8th punishing winds;
7th resist energy
Constrict [one-action] 2d10+17 bludgeoning, DC 40. On a failed save, a creature that is holding
its breath loses 1d4 rounds worth of air.
Double Attack [one-action] The kraken makes two Strikes with two different arms or tentacles, each
limb targeting a different creature. Double Attack counts
as two attacks toward the kraken’s multiple attack
penalty for further actions, but the penalty doesn’t
increase until after both attacks are made. If the
kraken subsequently uses the Grab action, it Grabs
any number of creatures it hit with Double Attack.
Ink Cloud [one-action] The kraken emits a cloud of black,
venomous ink in an 80-foot emanation.
This cloud has no effect outside
water. Creatures inside the ink
cloud are exposed to kraken
ink poison and are undetected
while inside the cloud. The
kraken can’t use Ink
Cloud again for 2d6
rounds, and the cloud
dissipates after 1 minute.
Jet [one-action] (move) The kraken
moves through the water
up to 280 feet in a straight
line without triggering
reactions.
Kraken Ink (poison);
Krakens are immune to this
poison. Saving Throw DC 39
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 10
rounds; Stage 1 3d6 poison damage
and sickened 1 (1 round); Stage 2 4d6
poison damage and sickened 2 (1 round).
KRAKEN LOCATIONS
A kraken dwells in deep ocean
trenches, sunken cities, or caves
and reefs near hydrothermal vents.
It seeks food near the surface,
however, where it can prey on
seagoing vessels.
H-K
215

214
KROOTH GUTS
While krooth lairs can contain
valuables in the form of gear
and magic items found on dead
adventurers, the strange enzymes
and other chemicals found in the
internal organs of male krooths,
particularly the liver, pancreas,
and kidneys, are of great value
to alchemists who seek to
concoct elixirs and potions with
transmutation effects. A single
male krooth’s organs, properly
harvested and preserved, can be
sold to an interested alchemist.
Krooth
Krooths, sometimes called crocodile eaters, are fast and vicious hunters of bogs and
wetlands. While they are known to hunt and eat crocodiles, alligators, and virtually
any creature with flesh, their favorite prey are lizardfolk, boggards, and dinosaurs.
Krooths are found alone or in packs. Male krooths are solitary and territorial
creatures-fierce, bold, and bloodthirsty. Female krooths, on the other hand, are
likely to shy away from potential predators but swiftly turn violent when their
brood is threatened. Because their offspring are so vulnerable, female krooths
gather in packs to raise their young, sending smaller groups to hunt for food
while the rest of the pack watches the brood. Krooths mate only once every 4
or 5 years, and the mating process is a curiously gruesome spectacle. An entire
pack of females will hunt as a group for a lone male krooth, claiming their prize
in an orgiastic frenzy that can last for an entire day and night. After the mating
has finished, the females slay their mate and devour his nutrient-rich flesh, and
his organs in particular. These organs contain a unique chemical compound vital
to gestation. Many naturalists will pay handsomely for the fresh remains of a
male krooth so they can study the strange properties of the creature’s blood and
organs. In addition, krooths have poisonous, hollow teeth. When these creatures
bite their prey, a tooth breaks off and causes the victim to bleed profusely as their
blood pours through the hollow tooth.
Whether male or female, krooths seem to be repelled by goblinoid flesh,
especially that of bugbears. This doesn’t mean krooths won’t kill goblinoids,
especially those threatening their young, but they typically do so using only
their claws and tails, and they take great care to clean themselves thoroughly
after such a killing.
KROOTH CREATURE 8
N LARGE AMPHIBIOUS ANIMAL
Perception +16; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Athletics +18, Stealth +18 (+20 in water), Survival +17 (+20 to Track a bleeding
creature)
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 26; Fort +20, Ref +17, Will +14, +4 status to all saves vs. fear
HP 150
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Tail only.
Pain Frenzy Whenever the krooth is damaged by a critical hit, it gains a +2 status bonus
to attack and damage rolls until the end of its next turn. It can’t use reactions while
this frenzy lasts.
Speed 40 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +20 (deadly 1d10, poison, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+9 piercing plus
Poison Tooth
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d8+9 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +20 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+9 piercing
Aquatic Ambush [one-action]
Poison Tooth [one-action] (poison); Requirements The krooth
damaged a creature with its jaws on its most recent
action this turn. Effect The krooth snaps off one of
its teeth in the creature it hit. The creature takes
1d6 persistent bleed damage and is drained 1.
Neither can be healed while the tooth remains.
Removing the tooth safely requires a successful
DC 26 check to Administer First Aid. Instead of
ending bleeding or stabilizing,
this removes the drained
condition, but it doesn’t
automatically end the
bleed damage.
L-N
217

216
LAMIA TREASURE
Lamias salvage gold, jewels, and
magic items from the abandoned
temples and ruined cities where
they make their lairs. They
sometimes arm themselves with
enchanted daggers.
LAMIA LOCATIONS
Lamias dwell on the edge of
civilization in crumbling keeps,
abandoned cities, and the fallen
temples of forgotten gods.
Lamia
Lamias are bloodthirsty victims of an ancient curse for which they blame the
gods. Most lamias are humanoid from the waist up but have the lower bodies of
beasts and monsters. Sinister magic comes naturally to a lamia, and they prefer
the use of illusions and enchantments to deceive prey for later consumption, or
simply to torture.
Lamia
Just as they were cursed long ago, lamias can curse those they touch, clouding the
mind and regressing conscious thought to purely animalistic instincts. Creatures
affected by this curse grow reckless, becoming unaware of the consequences of
their own actions and unable to think clearly. This makes the hapless victim all
the more susceptible to the lamia’s cunning illusions and insidious charms. The
lamia’s animalistic nature and the effect of their cursed touch has led some scholars
to theorize that the original lamias must have, millennia ago, turned away from
their own reason and intellect and embraced the life of simple beasts. Whether
this change was rewarded as a monstrous gift from Lamashtu or inflicted as a
curse for abandoning their responsibilities by Pharasma remains the subject of
debate to this day.
Whatever the source of this ancient transformation, lamias themselves have
grown to enjoy the strengths it has granted them. Regardless, they continue
to cling to a hatred of the gods, seeing them as the cause of their monstrous
forms and, thus, their eternal exile from the societies they watch with
jealous eyes from their lairs amid the ruins of lost civilizations. Because
lamias blame divine powers for their curse, they take special delight
in the downfall of temples, the suffering and death of champions and
clerics, and the spread of dissension within organized religions.
While they can briefly assume humanoid form with magic, lamias
are usually forced to hide from civilization, making their homes in
the barren wilderness. There, they attract cults of their own, gathering
up chaotic and evil humanoids. With the help of these cultists,
lamias strive to bring down popular faiths, introduce schisms
into flourishing churches, and humiliate or defame highprofile religious leaders. Most lamias themselves have no
true religious faith in anything, hearing instead a mystical
calling that manifests as sighs on the desert wind or
murmurs from the dark places between the stars.
Lamias are traditionally matriarchal, revering
the eldest female among them as leader, mother,
and shaman.
LAMIA CREATURE 6
CE LARGE BEAST
Perception +13; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Common
Skills Cult Lore +11, Deception +15, Diplomacy +11, Intimidation +13,
Stealth +15, Survival +11
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +3
Items javelin (2), +1 spear
AC 24; Fort +12, Ref +15, Will +15
HP 95
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] spear +17, Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage 1d6+8 slashing plus Grab
Ranged [one-action] spear +14 (thrown 20 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+8 piercing
Ranged [one-action] javelin +15 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Occult Innate Spells DC 25; 4th charm (×3), suggestion; 3rd sleep; 2nd humanoid 
L-N
217

216
OTHER LAMIAS
Adventurers report encounters
with other varieties of lamia,
including immense versions
with the upper torsos of giants,
monstrosities driven by insatiable
hunger, or flying buzzard-like
beasts with hardly any humanoid
features, yet all of these variants
bow to the wisdom and influence
of the lamia matriarchs.
form (at will), mirror image; 1st illusory disguise (at will), illusory object (at will),
ventriloquism (at will)
Lamia’s Caress [two-actions] (curse, enchantment, mental, occult) The lamia touches a creature,
who must succeed at a DC 23 Will save or become stupefied 1. If the target fails
additional saves against this ability, the condition value increases by 1 (to a maximum
of stupefied 4). This condition value decreases by 1 every 24 hours.
Lamia Matriarch
The brilliant and powerful lamia matriarchs possess boundless ambition, always
seeking to bring more people and territory into the clutches of their kind.
Consequently, the become rulers of other lamia. For all their cruelty toward
other creatures, they’re fierce protectors of other lamia, and consequently they
quickly come to rule cults or warbands. Regardless of the lamia’s gender, these
ascended lamias are always known as matriarchs. Rather than leonine limbs,
a lamia matriarch’s lower body is formed in the winding coils of a giant
snake. They’re also set apart by the occult power they pursue, and some have
even have grand designs to break the animalistic curse that transformed
them. However, every attempt so far has led to the
matriarch’s fall.
LAMIA MATRIARCH CREATURE 8
CE LARGE BEAST
Perception +15; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic
Skills Athletics +18, Cult Lore +15, Deception +20, Diplomacy +20, Intimidation
+18, Occultism +17, Stealth +16, Survival +13
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +6
Items +1 striking scimitar
AC 27; Fort +13, Ref +18, Will +17; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 135; Immunities controlled; Resistances mental 10
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +19 (forceful +2, sweep), Damage 2d6+10 slashing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 28; 3rd (4 slots) dispel magic, enthrall,
haste, mind reading; 2nd (4 slots) blur, death knell, illusory creature,
invisibility; 1st (4 slots) bless, magic missile, phantom pain,
soothe; Cantrips (3rd) daze, detect magic, mage hand,
prestidigitation, read aura
Occult Innate Spells DC 28; 4th charm (×3), suggestion (×3), 3rd
sleep; 2nd illusory disguise (at will), illusory object (at will),
mirror image; 1st ventriloquism (at will)
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph,
transmutation) The lamia matriarch can take on the
appearance of a Medium humanoid. This doesn’t change
their Speed or their attack and damage modifiers with
their Strikes, but it does prevent them from using their
cursed touch. Each lamia matriarch has a fixed humanoid form-
they cannot adopt a different appearance each time they use this
ability, and the appearance resembles that of their upper torso
when in their true form.
Dervish Strike [three-actions] The lamia matriarch makes a scimitar
attack against each enemy within reach. Each attack counts
toward their multiple attack penalty, but the penalty does
not increase until after all the attacks. The first enemy she
damages is subject to matriarch’s caress.
Matriarch’s Caress [two-actions] (curse, enchantment, mental, occult) As
Lamia’s Caress, but DC 28, and the creature is stupefied 2 (or has
its existing stupefied increased by 2) if it critically fails.
L-N
219

218
ASSOCIATED MONSTERS
Because of their relative frailty,
leaf leshys frequently act as
liaisons and call upon more
powerful forest guardians when
their domains are threatened.
Nymphs, sprites, and other goodly
fey may respond to the call of a
leaf leshy, as do arboreals and
other plant creatures.
Leshy
Leshys are intelligent plant creatures that guard areas of primeval wilderness or
earthly power. Originally created by powerful fey, they manifest when a skilled
practitioner of primal magic-typically a druid-combines a nature spirit with
a body carefully grown from local vegetation. The rites and materials required
to create a leshy vary depending on the type of leshy. They are typically given
life in an area of great natural significance, such as an arboreal’s grove, a druidic
circle, a fairy ring, or a great natural wonder.
Leaf Leshy
Leaf leshys are diminutive protectors of forests clad in pine cone armor and hats
of fruit, flowers, or leaves. They enjoy mock battles but act cautiously in real ones.
LEAF LESHY CREATURE 0
N SMALL LESHY PLANT
Perception +4; low-light vision
Languages Common, Druidic, Sylvan; speak with plants (trees only)
Skills Acrobatics +4, Nature +4, Stealth +4
Str –1, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items longspear
AC 18; Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +4
HP 15, Weaknesses fire 2
Verdant Burst (healing) When a leaf leshy dies, a burst of primal
energy explodes from its body, restoring 1d4 Hit Points to each plant
creature in a 30-foot emanation. This area is filled with tree saplings,
becoming difficult terrain. If the terrain is not a viable environment
for these trees, they wither after 24 hours.
Speed 25 feet; glide
Melee [one-action] longspear +3 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8–1 piercing
Ranged [one-action] seedpod +6 (range increment 30 feet), Damage 1d6
bludgeoning plus deafening blow
Primal Innate Spells DC 14; 4th speak with plants
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation)
The leaf leshy transforms into a Small tree. This ability otherwise
uses the effects of tree shape.
Deafening Blow When a leaf leshy hits with its seedpod
Strike, the target must attempt a DC 16 Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and temporarily
immune for 24 hours.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is deafened for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target is deafened for 1 minute.
Glide [one-action] (move) The leshy glides gently through the air, moving
5 feet toward the ground and up to 25 feet forward. As long
as the leshy spends at least 1 action gliding each round, it
remains in the air at the end of each turn. For the purpose of
determining damage from falls, a leaf leshy always treats falls
as if they were 20 feet shorter.
Gourd Leshy
Gourd leshys are guardians of fields, gardens, and
farms. Many villages benefit from the protection of a
gourd leshy, even if they are unaware of it.
GOURD LESHY CREATURE 1
N SMALL LESHY PLANT
Perception +5; low-light vision
L-N
219

218
DEAD LESHYS
When a leshy dies, its body
explodes in a wave of vegetation
as its spirit returns to the natural
world. Though leshy spirits that
are called into new bodies after
death typically keep only vague
recollections of their pasts, they
retain many of the values and
habits of their former life.
Languages Common, Druidic, Sylvan; speak with plants (gourds only)
Skills Nature +5, Stealth +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +0
Keepsake (abjuration, primal) The leshy can store an item of light Bulk or less in its head,
concealing it as nondetection. If stored for 24 hours, the item benefits from mending.
AC 17; Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 20
Verdant Burst (healing) As leaf leshy, except plants regain 1d8 Hit Points and the area
sprouts gourds instead of tree saplings.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +7 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning plus ensnare
Ranged [one-action] seed +9 (range increment 30 feet), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning plus ensnare
Primal Innate Spells DC 15; 4th speak with plants
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation) As leaf leshy, except
the gourd leshy transforms into a gourd-bearing plant.
Ensnare When the gourd leshy damages a creature with a fist or seed Strike, vines lash
out from the leshy (or seed) and wrap around the target’s limbs. The target must
attempt a DC 17 Reflex save. On a failure, the target takes a –10-foot status penalty to
its Speed for 1 round; on a critical failure, the target is immobilized for 1 round and the
penalty to Speed lasts for 1 minute.
Fungus Leshy
Fungus leshys guard caves, bogs, and damp, dark places.
Their fungus gardens are bizarre by most standards, but
fungus leshys are extremely proud of their works.
FUNGUS LESHY CREATURE 2
N SMALL FUNGUS LESHY
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Common, Druidic, Sylvan; speak with
plants (fungi only)
Skills Athletics +6, Nature +6, Stealth +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 30
Verdant Burst (healing) As leaf leshy, except only fungi are healed,
they regain 2d8 Hit Points, and the area sprouts fungi.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +10 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] spore pod +10 (range increment 30 feet),
Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning plus spores
Primal Innate Spells DC 16; 4th speak with plants
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph,
primal, transmutation) As leaf leshy, except
the fungus leshy transforms into a giant
mushroom or patch of fungi.
Spore Cloud [two-actions] (poison) A fungus leshy can unleash a cloud of
spores that irritates the eyes and throats of non-fungi
creatures in a 15-foot emanation. Each creature must
succeed at a DC 16 Fortitude save or take 1 persistent
poison damage. A creature has its vision reduced as long
as the persistent damage continues and can see only
within 20 feet (or 10 feet, on a critical failure).
Spores A creature that takes damage from a fungus
leshy’s spore pod Strike must attempt a saving
throw with the same DC and effect as its Spore
Cloud ability.
L-N
221

220
LICH CRAFTING
Liches spend a good deal of their
downtime crafting magic items. In
particular, a lich will create items
that help it defeat and overcome
known problems. This fact can
prove especially dangerous if the
PCs encounter a lich but fail to
destroy its phylactery, for the next
time they encounter the lich, it will
likely have just the right tools to
overcome their defenses.
Lich
To gain more time to complete their goals, some desperate spellcasters pursue
immortality by embracing undeath. After long years of research and the creation of
a special container called a phylactery, a spellcaster takes the final step by imbibing
a deadly concoction or casting dreadful incantations that transform them into a lich.
While most undertake this drastic plan to continue their work or fulfill some long-term
plan, others become liches because they fear death or to fulfill some malevolent
purpose, such as long-sworn revenge. Regardless, the result is permanent and carries
with it the potential to alter history-both that of those who transform themselves
and of the countless mortals that will inevitably suffer as a result of a lich’s new power.
After its metamorphosis, a lich often finds some quiet place to dwell, typically
protected by a variety of guardians and traps, for two primary purposes. First, a lich
requires solitude in order to plan its elaborate schemes, and second, few mortals
(if any) deign to interact with these legendarily corrupt necromancers. One reason
begets the other, as the self-imposed isolation of a lich often drives the lich insane,
further solidifying its separation from civilization. The longer a lich lives, the
more meticulous a planner it becomes, secreting itself within a labyrinth of deadly
puzzles, misdirection, and monsters. A lich’s servants and guardians are absolutely
loyal, either due to their nature (such as constructs or other undead) or as a result of
compulsion using powerful magic. Many liches go mad, in time, and the nature of a
lich’s lair is a good indicator of the undead’s current mental state.
For all the protections it arrays around itself, a lich will go to greater lengths to
guard its phylactery, as it knows that the destruction of this magical container spells
doom for the lich. A lich is notoriously difficult to bargain with, though the threat of
damaging its phylactery is a sure way to gain the upper hand in such a negotiation.
Creating A Lich
A lich can be any type of spellcaster, as long as it has the ability to perform a
ritual of undeath as the primary caster (which can usually be performed only by a
spellcaster capable of casting 6th-level spells). To create a lich, follow these steps.
Increase the spellcaster’s level by 1 and change its statistics as follows.
• Increase spell DCs and spell attack roll by 2.
Lich Abilities
A lich gains the undead trait and becomes evil. Liches lose all abilities that come
from being a living creature.
A lich gains the following abilities.
Darkvision
Saving Throws +1 status bonus to all saves vs. positive
Negative Healing
Rejuvenation (arcane, necromancy) When a lich is destroyed, its soul immediately
transfers to its phylactery. A lich can be permanently destroyed only if its phylactery
is found and destroyed.
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious
Resistances cold 20, physical 15 (except magic bludgeoning)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 60 feet, DC 30
Hand of the Lich All liches have a hand unarmed attack that deals 1d8 negative damage
for every 3 levels and inflicts a paralyzing touch. This attack has the finesse trait.
Drain Phylactery [free-action] Frequency once per day; Effect The lich taps into its phylactery’s
power to cast any arcane spell up to the highest level the lich can cast, even if the spell
being cast is not one of the lich’s prepared spells. The lich’s phylactery doesn’t need to
be present for the lich to use this ability.
Paralyzing Touch (arcane, curse, incapacitation, necromancy) A creature damaged by the
lich’s hand Strike must succeed at a Fortitude save against the lich’s spell DC – 4. The
creature becomes paralyzed for 1 round on a failure. On a critical failure, the creature is
paralyzed permanently, falls prone, and seems dead. A DC 25 Medicine check reveals
the victim is alive.
L-N
221

220
LICH TREASURE
The lair of a lich is usually filled
with several magical treasures,
particularly items that the undead
can use based on its spellcasting
abilities. Scrolls, wands, and
staves are quite common,
as are books of lore and
tomes containing entirely
new spells.
Alternate Lich Abilities
Although the abilities on page 220 are standard for a lich, you can create a
more unusual lich by substituting any one of the following abilities for frightful
presence, hand of the lich, Drain Phylactery, or paralyzing touch.
Blasphemous Utterances (arcane, aura, enchantment, mental) 10 feet. The lich is
accompanied by a constant echo of blasphemous murmurs and tainted whispers. A
creature in the aura takes a –2 circumstance penalty to saves against mental effects
and can’t take actions that have the concentrate trait unless they succeed at a DC 10
flat check. Failing this check wastes the action.
Cold Beyond Cold The lich’s hand Strike deals cold damage instead of negative, and
instead of being paralyzed, the target is slowed 2. A successful Fortitude save reduces
this to slowed 1 (or negates it on a critical success).
Dark Deliverance The lich has resistance to positive equal to its level.
Siphon Life [reaction] Trigger The lich deals damage with its hand Strike. Effect The lich regains
Hit Points equal to half the damage dealt.
Void Shroud (aura, death, necromancy) 30 feet. The lich is surrounded by an aura of death,
drawing forth souls to be consumed by the lich’s constant hunger. Living creatures in
the emanation take a –2 status penalty to saves against fear and death effects. In
addition, any creature that starts its turn in the area gains the doomed 1 condition
unless it succeeds at a Will save against the lich’s spell DC – 4.
Lich
A wizard whose insatiable desire for arcane power eclipsed their
mortal life, the lich is a truly devious and versatile spellcaster.
LICH CREATURE 12
RARE NE MEDIUM UNDEAD
Perception +20; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Aklo, Common, Draconic, Elf, Infernal, Necril,
Undercommon
Skills Arcana +28, Crafting +24 (can craft magic items), Deception +17,
Diplomacy +19, Religion +22, Stealth +20
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +6, Wis +4, Cha +3
Items potion of invisibility, scroll of teleport, greater staff of fire
AC 31; Fort +17, Ref +21, Will +23; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 190, negative healing, rejuvenation; Immunities death effects, disease,
paralyzed, poison, unconscious; Resistances cold 10, physical 10 (except
magic bludgeoning)
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 60 feet, DC 29
Counterspell [reaction] Trigger A creature casts a spell the lich has prepared. Effect
The lich expends a prepared spell to counter the triggering creature’s
casting of that same spell. The lich loses its spell slot as if it had cast the
triggering spell. The lich then attempts to counteract the triggering spell.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] hand +24 (finesse, magical), Damage 4d8 negative plus
paralyzing touch
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 36, attack +26; 6th chain lightning, dominate,
vampiric exsanguination; 5th cloudkill, cone of cold (×2), wall of ice; 4th
dimension door, dispel magic, fire shield, fly; 3rd blindness, locate, magic
missile, vampiric touch; 2nd false life, mirror image, resist energy, see invisibility;
1st fleet step, ray of enfeeblement (×2), true strike; Cantrips (6th) detect magic,
mage hand, message, ray of frost, shield
Drain Phylactery [free-action] 6th level
Paralyzing Touch (arcane, curse, incapacitation, necromancy) DC 32
Steady Spellcasting If a reaction would disrupt the lich’s spellcasting
action, the lich attempts a DC 15 flat check. On a
success, the action isn’t disrupted.
L-N
223

222
UNIQUE LICHDOM
The exact ritual, ingredients
for deadly concoctions, and
magical conditions required to
become a lich are unique and
different for every living creature.
Understanding a spellcaster’s path
to lichdom can help, but is no
guarantee of success for others.
LICH PHYLACTERY ITEM 12
RARE ARCANE NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Price 1,600 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk -
This item is crafted by a spellcaster who wishes to become a lich. When a lich is
destroyed, its soul flees to the phylactery. The phylactery then rebuilds the lich’s undead
body over the course of 1d10 days. Afterward, the lich manifests next to the phylactery,
fully healed and in a new body (therefore, it lacks any equipment it had on its old body).
A lich’s phylactery must be destroyed to prevent a lich from returning.
The standard phylactery is a sealed metal box containing strips of parchment inscribed
with magical phrases. This box has Hardness 9 and 36 HP, but some liches devise more
durable or difficult-to-obtain phylacteries. A phylactery might also come in the form of a
ring, an amulet, or a similar item; the specifics are up to the creator.
Demilich
Demiliches are formed when a lich, through carelessness or by accident, loses its
phylactery. As years pass, the lich’s body crumbles to dust, leaving only the skull
as the seat of its necromantic power. The lich enters a sort of torpor, its mind left
wandering the planes in search of ever greater mysteries. The lich gradually loses
the ability to cast spells and its magic items slowly subsume into its new form.
Negative energy concentrates around the skull, causing some of its bones and
teeth to petrify with power and turn into blight crystals. The resulting lich skull,
embedded with arcane gemstones and suffused with palpably powerful magic,
forms a creature called a demilich.
Despite its near-constant state of inactivity, a demilich grows restless from time
to time, especially when living creatures draw near. Only then does the demilich’s
hunger for life stir once more, causing it to lash out with terrifying bursts of power
in attempts to consume vital energy. Unlike an ordinary lich, should the demilich’s
skull be destroyed, its bond to the world is permanently severed, although some
theorize that even then it is not truly slain. Rather, some think that once the
demilich is destroyed, its foul and tormented mind is finally free to wander the
planes and find new ways to enact its will. For the short-lived common folk of the
Material Plane, this is good enough, though eons later a demilich may reappear
in the region it once inhabited with a new-and even more insidious-agenda.
DEMILICH CREATURE 15
RARE NE TINY UNDEAD
Perception +19; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Aklo, Common, Draconic, Elf, Infernal, Necril, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +25, Arcana +32, Deception +26, Occultism +30, Religion +21,
Stealth +25
Str –3, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +7, Wis –2, Cha +5
Items demilich eye gem (2)
Torpor Typically, a demilich is inert when encountered and doesn’t take actions until its
contingency reaction has been triggered (see below).
AC 38; Fort +23, Ref +27, Will +23; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 220, negative healing; Immunities disease, paralyzed, poison, polymorph,
unconscious; Resistances cold 5, electricity 5, fire 5, physical 5 (except bludgeoning)
Telekinetic Whirlwind (arcane, aura, evocation) 20 feet. Telekinetic whirlwind
activates when the demilich ends torpor. Loose debris in the area whip up into a
whirling storm. This obscures vision, making any creature in the area concealed,
and causes creatures in its area (except the demilich) to treat all creatures as
concealed. Any creature other than the demilich that enters or begins its turn in
the aura takes 2d12 bludgeoning damage.
Contingency [reaction] A demilich has one permanent 8th-level contingency spell in effect
with one of its arcane innate spells of 5th level or lower as the companion spell-
typically dimension door. Trigger While the lich is in torpor, a creature disturbs 
L-N
223

222
ASSOCIATED MONSTERS
Undead minions are very common
companions for a lich or demilich.
Liches prefer mindless undead,
that do what they’re told and don’t
interrupt the lich’s studies with
useless conversation. Liches with
a knack for crafting are also fond
of surrounding themselves with
construct servitors and guardians,
such as golems.
the demilich’s remains, touches its treasure, or casts a spell that would affect the
demilich. Effect The demilich ends torpor, rolls initiative, and gains the effect of its
contingency’s companion spell. The contingency resets after 24 hours.
Countermeasures [free-action] Trigger The demilich’s turn begins. Effect The demilich casts blink,
fly, spell turning, or true seeing on itself. It usually chooses spell turning unless it
already has that spell in effect.
Speed fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +27 (reach 0 feet, finesse, magical), Damage 1d4–3 piercing plus 6d6 negative
Arcane Innate Spells DC 40, attack +30; 9th wail of the banshee; 7th spell turning (at
will); 4th blink (at will), dimension door (at will), telekinetic maneuver (at will); Cantrips
(8th) mage hand, telekinetic projectile; Constant (6th) true seeing
Demilich Eye Gems (arcane) A demilich has gemstone eyes that glow when the demilich
is active. Each eye contains an 8th-level spell that targets one creature (usually one
eye has maze and the other polar ray). The demilich can Activate an eye. This uses
the number of spellcasting actions the spell requires, and also requires command and
envision components. When the demilich casts a spell from a gemstone eye, that
eye stops glowing for 1d4 rounds, during which time that eye’s spell can’t be used.
Occasionally, one or both of the two demilich eye gems can be harvested from a
destroyed demilich as magic items (see below).
Devour Soul [one-action] (arcane, necromancy, negative) Requirements A soul has been trapped
in one of the demilich’s blight quartz gems (see Trap Soul) for 24 hours. Effect The
demilich consumes the soul. The soul is utterly destroyed, and the demilich regains
HP equal to double the creature’s level.
Mental Magic A demilich can replace all material and somatic components for casting
spells with verbal components, and can replace all Interact components for activating
magic items with envision components.
Staff Gems A demilich long ago absorbed the spells from a staff into gemstone nodules
embedded in its skull, with larger nodules representing higher-level spells. It can cast
any of the spells as though it were Activating the staff, and regains 1 charge per
4 hours spent in torpor, to a maximum of 8 charges. A typical demilich has the
spells from a greater staff of necromancy, but it could have spells from
another staff of 8th level or lower instead.
Trap Soul [one-action] command Frequency once per day per gem; Effect Ten
blight quartz gemstones on the demilich’s skull can trap the
souls of the living. The Activated gem casts bind soul. This bind
soul can target and affect a dying creature instead of a corpse.
The dying creature can attempt a DC 38 Fortitude save; if
it succeeds, it doesn’t die and its soul is not trapped but it’s
enervated 2 (or is unaffected entirely on a critical success).
When the soul of a creature gets trapped, the creature’s body
swiftly turns to dust.
The gemstones work like the black sapphires used in
bind soul, except that they can hold creatures of up to
17th level and have a value of 200 gp apiece. The demilich
can Devour a Soul it has trapped.
DEMILICH EYE GEM ITEM 15
RARE ARCANE
Price 3,000 gp (can’t be crafted)
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk -
This glowing gem is harvested from a demilich and has an 8th-level spell
magically bonded to it. This item has the traits of the spell it contains.
Activate command, Interact Frequency once per day; Effect The gem casts
the 8th-level spell it contains. This activation uses the same number of actions
as Casting the Spell. Once the spell is cast, the gem’s glow fades, but returns 24
hours later, when the spell can be used once again.
Craft Requirements Demilich eye gems can’t be crafted.
L-N
225

224
LINNORM KINGS
In the storied Lands of the
Linnorm Kings, the slaying of a
linnorm is traditionally required for
those who would claim a nation’s
crown. Recently, though, the
Linnorm King White Estrid claimed
her crown not by slaying a linnorm
but by beating it into submission,
gaining a powerful and dangerous
ally to help secure her rule.
Linnorm
Immense, primeval dragons of the northern reaches of the world, linnorms hate
those they deem to be lesser creatures and seek to inflict as much suffering as possible
upon their unfortunate victims. While these serpentine monstrosities might not be
the powerful winged dragons most imagine, they nonetheless possess incredible
strength and deadly powers that often rival authentic dragon brutality.
Crag Linnorm
Despite being among the weakest linnorms, the crag linnorm is a devastating
predator, capable of quickly cooking its foes with its magma breath.
CRAG LINNORM CREATURE 14
UNCOMMON CE GARGANTUAN DRAGON FIRE
Perception +26; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, true seeing
Languages Aklo, Draconic, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +22, Athletics +28
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +6, Int –3, Wis +4, Cha +5
AC 37; Fort +28, Ref +24, Will +22; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 270, regeneration 10 (deactivated by cold iron); Immunities curse, fire, paralyzed,
sleep; Weaknesses cold iron 10
Curse of Fire (curse, fire, primal) When a creature slays a crag linnorm, it must succeed
at a DC 35 Will save or permanently gain weakness to fire 15.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Tail only.
Speed 35 feet, fly 100 feet, swim 60 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +30 (reach 20 feet, magical), Damage 3d12+14 piercing plus crag
linnorm venom
Melee [one-action] claw +30 (reach 20 feet, magical), Damage 3d8+14 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +30 (reach 20 feet, magical), Damage 3d6+14 bludgeoning plus
Improved Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 33; Constant (6th) freedom of movement; (5th) true seeing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The crag linnorm breathes out a stream
of magma in a 120-foot line that deals 12d6 fire damage to creatures within
the area (DC 34 basic Reflex save). Any creature that fails its
save also takes 4d6 persistent fire damage. The crag linnorm
can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds. The magma
remains until the start of the linnorm's next turn. If the
linnorm was on the ground, the magma remains as a
burning line on the ground directly under the line of
the Breath Weapon, and if the linnorm was airborne,
the magma rains downward in a sheet 60 feet high.
Any creature that moves across or through the
magma takes 6d6 fire damage (DC 34 basic Reflex
save). At the start of the linnorm's next turn,
the magma cools to a thin layer of brittle
stone on the ground, or the magma rain
finishes falling and turns to harmless
pebbles. The cooled magma quickly
degrades to powder and sand over the
course of several hours.
Constrict [one-action] 2d6+14 bludgeoning, DC 34
Crag Linnorm Venom (fire, injury, poison)
Saving Throw DC 34
Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 10 rounds;
Stage 1 4d6 fire damage
and drained 1; Stage 2 6d6 fire damage and drained 2.
L-N
225

224
DEATH CURSES
The death curses of the linnorms
are often the subjects of tragic
sagas, and those who would think
themselves vanquishing heroes
for slaying a linnorm often meet
their dooms soon thereafter,
succumbing to these curses well
after the death of the linnorm
responsible for bestowing it.
Ice Linnorm
The ice linnorm dwells amid glacial crevasses, atop wind-blasted mountain peaks,
or within glittering caverns carved from the hearts of the mightiest of icebergs.
ICE LINNORM CREATURE 17
UNCOMMON CE GARGANTUAN COLD DRAGON
Perception +29; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, true seeing
Languages Aklo, Draconic, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +28, Athletics +32
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +7, Int –3, Wis +6, Cha +7
AC 41; Fort +32, Ref +28, Will +27; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 330, regeneration 10 (deactivated by cold iron); Immunities cold, curse, paralyzed,
sleep; Weaknesses cold iron 15, fire 10
Curse of Frost (cold, curse, primal) When a creature slays an ice linnorm, it must
succeed at a DC 40 Will save or permanently gain weakness to cold 15.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Tail only.
Speed 35 feet, fly 100 feet, swim 40 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +34 (reach 25 feet, magical), Damage 3d12+17 piercing plus ice linnorm venom
Melee [one-action] claw +34 (reach 20 feet, agile, magical), Damage 3d8+17 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +34 (reach 25 feet, agile, magical), Damage 3d6+17
bludgeoning plus Improved Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 38; Constant (8th) freedom of
movement; (7th) true seeing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (cold, evocation, primal) The ice linnorm
spews out a blast of freezing, viscous ooze in a 60-foot
cone that deals 15d6 cold damage to creatures within the
area (DC 38 basic Reflex save). The freezing ooze clings
to those struck and hardens into thick sheets of ice. A
creature that fails the saving throw is immobilized by
the ice until it succeeds at a check to Escape or it or
an ally Forces Open the ice (DC 34 for either case). At
the start of its turn, a creature still immobilized by the
ice takes 4d6 cold damage. Another creature can free a
frozen target by dealing a total of 20 fire damage to the
frozen target. Left unattended, the ice crumbles away in
1 minute on its own. Creatures with the fire trait can't be
frozen in place by this breath weapon. Flying creatures fall if
frozen, and swimming creatures that are frozen rise toward
the surface of the water at a speed of 60 feet per round. An
ice linnorm can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Constrict [one-action] 2d6+18 bludgeoning, DC 38
Ice Linnorm Venom (cold, injury, poison) Saving Throw DC 38
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 10 rounds; Stage 1 5d6 cold
damage and drained 1; Stage 2 7d6 cold damage and
drained 2.
L-N
227

226
OTHER LINNORMS
Linnorms exist in a variety of
forms beyond the four detailed
here. The gaunt cairn linnorm,
the spiny taiga linnorm, and
the aquatic fjord linnorm each
terrorize their own specific
regions of the Material Plane.
Tarn Linnorm
Although more powerful linnorms exist, the multi-headed tarn linnorm can wreak
an awe-inspiring amount of devastation.
TARN LINNORM CREATURE 20
UNCOMMON CE GARGANTUAN ACID AMPHIBIOUS DRAGON
Perception +35; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, true seeing
Languages Aklo, Draconic, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +32, Athletics +38, Stealth +34
Str +10, Dex +6, Con +8, Int –1, Wis +7, Cha +8
AC 46; all-around vision; Fort +36, Ref +32, Will +31; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 400, regeneration 15 (deactivated by cold iron); Immunities acid, curse, paralyzed,
sleep; Weaknesses cold iron 15
Curse of Death (curse, death, primal) When a creature slays a tarn linnorm, it must
succeed at a DC 46 Will save or it can no longer recover Hit Points via any means,
such as healing spells, the Medicine skill, or natural healing from rest.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Tail only.
Speed 35 feet, fly 100 feet, swim 80 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +38 (reach 30 feet, magical), Damage 4d12+18 piercing plus tarn
linnorm venom
Melee [one-action] claw +38 (reach 30 feet, agile, magical), Damage 4d8+18 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +38 (reach 30 feet, agile, magical), Damage 4d6+18 bludgeoning plus
Improved Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 42; Constant (9th) freedom of
movement; (8th) true seeing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (acid, evocation, poison, primal) The
tarn linnorm can expel either a 120-foot line or a 60-foot
cone of acid dealing 20d6 acid damage to creatures
within the area (DC 44 basic Reflex save). The acid
creates toxic fumes. At the beginning of the linnorm’s
next turn, those who failed the breath weapon’s
Reflex save must succeed at a DC 42 Fortitude save
or gain sickened 4 from the poisonous fumes. A
tarn linnorm can’t use Breath Weapon or Overwhelming
Breath again for 1d4 rounds.
Constrict [one-action] 3d6+18 bludgeoning, DC 44
Double Bite [one-action] The tarn linnorm Strides and then makes a
jaws Strike with each of its heads, each against a different
target. These attacks count toward the tarn linnorm’s
multiple attack penalty, and the multiple attack penalty
doesn’t increase until after the tarn linnorm makes all of
these attacks.
Overwhelming Breath [three-actions] A tarn
linnorm uses its Breath Weapon
twice. A creature attempts only
one save and can take damage
only once. The tarn linnorm
can’t use Breath Weapon or
Overwhelming Breath again for
2d4 rounds.
Tarn Linnorm Venom (acid, injury,
poison) Saving Throw DC 44
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 10
rounds; Stage 1 7d6 acid damage
and drained 1; Stage 2
11d6 acid damage and
drained 2.
L-N
227

226
LINNORM TREASURE
As with true dragons, linnorms
tend to amass immense piles
of treasure in their lairs. These
hoards consist of the weapons,
gear, and belongings of would-be
vanquishers more often than
minted coins or works of art.
Tor Linnorm
Tor linnorms dwell in the tallest volcanic mountains, either within natural formed
caverns or within molten craters. A tor linnorm’s temper can be as hot and
destructive as the magma the creature resembles.
TOR LINNORM CREATURE 21
UNCOMMON CE GARGANTUAN DRAGON FIRE
Perception +37; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet, true seeing
Languages Aklo, Draconic, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +35, Athletics +40, Stealth +37
Str +11, Dex +8, Con +9, Int –1, Wis +8, Cha +9
AC 47; Fort +38, Ref +35, Will +33; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 440, regeneration 20 (deactivated by cold iron); Immunities curse, fire, paralyzed,
sleep; Weaknesses cold iron 15
Curse of Boiling Blood (curse, fire, primal) When a creature slays a tor linnorm, it
must succeed at a DC 48 Will save or permanently gain weakness to fire 20 and
slowed 1 from the agonizing pain it now endures at all times. As long as a character
continues to suffer this curse, its slowed condition can never be reduced below
slowed 1.
Lava Affinity A tor linnorm can breathe and swim freely while submerged in lava
and magma.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Tail only.
Speed 35 feet, climb 35 feet, fly 100 feet, swim 60 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +40 (reach 30 feet, magical), Damage 4d12+19 piercing plus tor
linnorm venom
Melee [one-action] claw +40 (reach 30 feet, agile, magical), Damage 4d8+19 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +40 (reach 30 feet, agile, magical), Damage 4d6+19 bludgeoning
plus Improved Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 44; Constant (9th) freedom of movement; (8th) true
seeing
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The tor linnorm expels a 60-
foot cone of flame and ash dealing 20d6 fire damage to creatures
within the area (DC 46 basic Reflex save). At the start of the tor
linnorm’s next turn, the area affected by the breath weapon
is covered in thick, scorching smoke that burns both the
lungs and eyes, dealing an additional 10d6 fire damage
to all creatures in the area (DC 46 basic Reflex save).
A creature that spends an entire round in the smoke
with open eyes must succeed at a DC 44 Fortitude
save or is blinded for 1 minute. The smoke dissipates
after 1 minute; in strong winds, the smoke
dissipates in 5 rounds, and in
more powerful winds, it may
clear even more quickly. The
tor linnorm can’t use Breath
Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Constrict [one-action] 3d6+21 bludgeoning,
DC 46
Slashing Claws [one-action] A tor linnorm
makes four Strikes with its claws, each
against a different target. These attacks
count toward the tor linnorm’s multiple attack
penalty, but the multiple attack penalty doesn’t
increase until after the tor linnorm makes all its attacks.
Tor Linnorm Venom (fire, injury, poison) Saving Throw DC 44
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 10 rounds; Stage 1 8d6 fire damage
and drained 1; Stage 2 12d6 fire damage and drained 2.
L-N
229

228
LIZARDS AND LIZARDFOLK
Giant lizards are often used as
mounts or guardians or kept
as pets, but never so often or
as traditionally as they are by
lizardfolk. The kinship these
people share with giant lizards
is unmistakable, valuing their
companionship to an extent that
equals or even exceeds that which
other societies have for popular
animal companions like dogs
and horses.
Lizard
Lizards have a wide range of appearances and abilities, but most share a basic
reptilian shape-long tails, wide toothy mouths, and four legs. While a few species
are capable of movement on two legs for short periods of time, most are strictly
quadrupedal. The three species presented here represent the most common and
well-known of the larger species.
Giant Gecko
These roughly human-sized reptiles have amazing feet capable of clinging
tenaciously to any surface. Giant geckos are typically docile and shy but can be
aggressive when cornered or defending their territory. These large-eyed lizards
are found in a wide variety of habitats, from rainforests and deserts to mountain
slopes or even underground caverns. They spend most of their time climbing
around in large trees or on rocky cliffs, whether hunting for small animals or
hiding from predators. A giant gecko’s scales are often quite brightly colored or
decorated in intricate patterns. Giant geckos span nearly 8 feet in length from
head to tail, and they weigh about 120 pounds.
Giant geckos are sometimes used by smaller humanoids as guardians
or mounts, as their docile nature makes them relatively easy to tame and
train. Their superior climbing skills make giant geckos particularly popular
within societies that dwell underground or near cliffs, such as goblins
and kobolds. Their bright coloration also makes them favorite exotic
pets in high society.
GIANT GECKO CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +5 (+9 to Climb), Stealth +6
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
Uncanny Climber A giant gecko’s feet allow it to climb
virtually any surface, no matter how slick or sheer. If a giant
gecko attempts an Athletics check to climb and critically
fails, it gets a failure instead.
AC 16; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +5
HP 20
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +8, Damage 1d8+2 piercing
Giant Monitor Lizard
Large and seemingly ponderous, a monitor lizard
is a deceptively swift and ruthless predator. It
ambushes its prey by rushing out from cover and
biting the target with its powerful jaws. A giant
monitor lizard’s saliva is venomous, allowing it to
bring down prey larger than it can easily haul away
in its jaws. Giant monitor lizards grow up to 14 feet
long, including their long tails, and they weigh
about 350 pounds. Their bodies are normally
dark brown with patches of yellow or green.
When nesting, a giant monitor lizard digs
a deep burrow to hide in. The burrow serves
as both a safe haven and a location from which
the lizard can ambush larger prey such as deer,
boars, or even humanoids. A giant monitor
lizard can consume nearly its own body weight in
a single meal, and its loosely articulated jaws allow it
to swallow surprisingly large prey.
L-N
229

228
OTHER GIANT LIZARDS
The three species of giant lizard
presented here are but the most
common of their kind encountered
in the wilds. Stories of much
larger lizards persist, including
the immense, 20-foot-long
monster known as a megalania,
a truly enormous version of the
giant monitor lizard capable of
swallowing creatures whole. Less
dangerous is the giant chameleon,
although its ability to blend into
its environs makes it a much more
insidious and stealthy threat than
the lumbering, mighty megalania.
GIANT MONITOR LIZARD CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +9, Stealth +6
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 30
Gnashing Grip [reaction] Trigger A creature grabbed by the giant monitor lizard’s jaws fails a
check to Escape. Effect The giant monitor lizard’s jaws deal 1d6 piercing damage and
the triggering creature is exposed to monitor lizard venom.
Speed 30 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d10+3 piercing plus Grab and monitor lizard venom
Lurching Charge [two-actions] The giant monitor lizard Strides twice and then makes a jaws
Strike. If the lizard moved at least 20 feet away from its starting position, it gains a +2
circumstance bonus to this attack roll.
Monitor Lizard Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2
(1 round)
Giant Frilled Lizard
Found in warm and tropical forests and savannas, these immense lizards are a
deadly threat to the unsuspecting traveler. When they aren’t sleeping or stalking
prey, giant frilled lizards bask in the sunlight for hours at a time. Explorers
sometimes mistakenly think them related to dragons due to their
large size, elaborate neck frills (which, when displayed in a show
of aggression and dominance, can be mistaken for wings), and
ferocious hissing vocalizations used to frighten away creatures
too large to eat.
A giant frilled lizard’s primary food sources are oversized
arthropods and other invertebrates, but it won’t hesitate to
augment its diet with vertebrates, including other lizards,
monkeys, and just about anything it can fit into its
mouth-even humanoids. Although capable of short
bursts of speed, a giant frilled lizard normally lies
perfectly still while hunting, hoping to ambush
its prey.
GIANT FRILLED LIZARD CREATURE 5
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +11; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +14, Stealth +10
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 22; Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +9
HP 75
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +16 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+7 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +16 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+7
bludgeoning
Intimidating Display [two-actions] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental,
visual) The giant frilled lizard Strides. If it ends that
Stride adjacent to at least one other creature, it
suddenly displays its colorful neck frills and issues
a frightening hiss. Each adjacent creature must
succeed at a DC 21 Will save or become frightened
2 (or frightened 3 on a critical failure). The creature
is then temporarily immune to Intimidating Display for
1 minute.
L-N
231

230
LIZARDFOLK RELATIONS
Though most are neutral in
alignment, the typical iruxi’s pride
in their traditions, suspicion of
others, and need to protect their kin
can make them seem standoffish or
even aggressive when encountered.
However, most are eager to learn
from visitors, trade stories
and equipment, and
forge alliances.
Lizardfolk
When human scholars speak of ancient civilizations, they usually turn their
focus to themselves, researching and lecturing on the first human empires.
When they drift to others, they invariably look to cultures that had conflicts
or alliances with ancient humanity. That the culture of the people called
lizardfolk often gets ignored or forgotten even by well-meaning researchers is
thus no surprise, but to the lizardfolk themselves it is no matter. They know
their history and value its integrity and privacy-if younger ancestries like
humanity aren’t interested in learning from lizardfolk empires dating back
to before the first human knocked two rocks together to make their first
campfire, that’s fine with them.
The word “lizardfolk” is an excellent example of humanity’s narrowsighted view of this culture. The name of their people is “iruxi,”
but these reptilian humanoids have patiently and
good-naturedly accepted the name “lizardfolk” as
a variant, and they generally resist urges
to call humans and other mammalians
similarly derivative names in return.
Iruxis dwell and thrive in all
tropical and temperate biomes, but
they are most at home in swamplands,
coastal regions, and riverlands, for they
are talented swimmers, and fish and
aquatic plants make up a large part of their
preferred diets.
Lizardfolk Defender
The lizardfolk defender serves as a protector of the young,
guardian of the settlement, and when no other options are available,
soldier in time of war. They eagerly rise to the defense of their kin but
do not revel in battle. An iruxi defender would rather turn back intruders
and allow them to flee with the knowledge they were beaten, in hopes that
such word prevents further invasions, but they are not naive. The iruxi
understand the need for revenge, and when they allow a foe to escape,
they do not forget.
LIZARDFOLK DEFENDER CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM HUMANOID LIZARDFOLK
Perception +7
Languages Draconic, Iruxi
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +6, Survival +5
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items flail, javelin (3), wooden shield (Hardness 3, HP 12, BT 6)
AC 16 (18 with shield raised); Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 21
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 25 feet, swim 15 feet
Melee [one-action] flail +8 (disarm, sweep, trip), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] jaws +8, Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +8 (agile), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +7 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Deep Breath A lizardfolk defender can hold their breath for 175 rounds
(17-1/2 minutes).
Terrain Advantage Non-lizardfolk creatures in difficult terrain and nonlizardfolk creatures that are in water and lack a swim Speed are flat-footed
to the lizardfolk defender.
L-N
231

230
LIZARDFOLK SOCIETY
Iruxis are, as a general rule,
quite religious. Those who
venerate deities typically look to
Gozreh, but some of them find
the teachings of Desna to be
compelling. Most iruxis, though,
instead follow druidic traditions,
ancestor worship, and astrological
philosophies in particular.
Lizardfolk Scout
Iruxi scouts are the lizardfolk most often encountered by adventurers, for
these explorers and hunters spend most of their lives on the move, constantly
patrolling the territories held by their enclave. If intruders are driven off, it is the
responsibility of the iruxi scouts to track them, observe them, and learn their ways
and weaknesses so as to report back to the community and aid in the defense
against potential reprisals.
LIZARDFOLK SCOUT CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM HUMANOID LIZARDFOLK
Perception +8
Languages Common, Draconic, Iruxi
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +5, Diplomacy +4, Nature +6, Stealth +6, Survival +8
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items blowgun (10 darts, 1 of which is coated with giant centipede venom)
AC 17; Fort +6, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 17
Speed 25 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +7, Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action]blowgun +8 (agile, nonlethal, range increment 20 feet, reload 1), Damage
1 piercing plus giant centipede venom
Deep Breath As lizardfolk defender, but 150 rounds (15 minutes).
Hidden Movement If the lizardfolk scout starts its turn undetected
by a creature or hidden from it, that creature is flat-footed against the scout’s
attacks until the end of the scout's turn.
Giant Centipede Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage (1 round); Stage 2 1d8 poison damage and
flat-footed (1 round); Stage 3 1d12 poison damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round)
Sneak Attack The lizardfolk scout deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
Terrain Advantage As lizardfolk defender.
Lizardfolk Stargazer
The tradition of astrology and looking to the stars for both
navigation and prognostication is well-established in iruxi society,
and their wise and observant stargazers are among the people’s
most respected members. Even the lowliest stargazer, as presented
here, has a number of useful primal spells to aid their kin; in larger
iruxi settlements, stargazers wield even greater powers.
LIZARDFOLK STARGAZER CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM HUMANOID LIZARDFOLK
Perception +8
Languages Draconic, Iruxi
Skills Diplomacy +4, Iruxi Lore +6, Nature +8, Stealth +6, Survival +8
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items staff
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +10
HP 30
Speed 25 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] staff +8 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] jaws +8, Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Primal Prepared Spells DC 20, attack +10; 1st charm, heal, magic fang, shillelagh,
summon animal; Cantrips (1st) guidance, know direction, produce flame, stabilize
Deep Breath As lizardfolk defender, but 200 rounds (20 minutes).
L-N
233

232
MANTICORE TREASURE
A manticore enjoys taking plunder
from the corpses of its prey as
trophies that flatter its vanity and
testify to its strength. It has little
interest in money, but sometimes
accepts gold and jewels as tribute.
Manticore
The manticore is a monstrous amalgamation of lion, dragon, and human with a
penchant for feasting on human flesh. Its distinctive tail is festooned with large
quills like those of a porcupine, which the manticore flings at prey by whipping
its tail like a sling. These deadly spikes give the manticore the power to slaughter
even well-armed warriors from the safety of the sky.
Although the anthropomorphic face of the manticore suggests a keen intellect,
most creatures of its kind are simple-minded killers. They can be clever liars,
however, and their voices have a strangely musical sound that has lured many
unwitting travelers into an ambush. A manticore discovered by uneducated
humanoids (especially those who are both lawful and evil) can sometimes become
the center of adoration and even worship; a manticore in this situation swiftly
gives in to its laziness and allows its acolytes to bring it tribute in the form of
food and treasure, feasting upon its own followers when offerings become scarce.
Stronger humanoids who encounter a manticore can cow it through intimidation
and violence, sometimes even forcing it into service as a mount. As long as the
manticore is well fed with human flesh and its master leads it to victory, a manticore
mount can prove surprisingly loyal.
MANTICORE CREATURE 6
LE LARGE BEAST
Perception +14; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +15, Intimidation +11,
Survival +12
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 23; Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 90
Speed 25 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +17, Damage 2d8+8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage
2d6+8 slashing
Ranged [one-action] spike +14 (range
increment 40 feet), Damage 1d10+5
piercing
Spike Volley [one-action] The manticore
flings up to two spikes from its
tail, targeting either two different
creatures or a single creature. If
the manticore targets two different
creatures, these creatures must be
within 20 feet of one another, and
the manticore makes a separate
Strike against each; this counts as
only one Strike for the manticore’s
multiple attack penalty, and the
penalty doesn’t increase until after
both attacks. If the manticore fires
both spikes at the same creature, it
makes a single Strike. If the attack hits, it
deals the damage of a single spike, but the target
is pinned in place, rendering it immobilized. A
creature that succeeds at a DC 23 Athletics
check (attempted as a single action) can
pull the spike free.
A manticore can hurl no more than 12
spikes in 24 hours.
MANTICORE LOCATIONS
Manticores prefer lonely places
in the wilderness far from
humanoids, but they adapt
easily to nearly any terrain.
Manticores have been spotted in
jungles, forests, deserts, and
mountains. 
L-N
233

232
SACRED INSECTS
Deadly mantises are sacrosanct to
followers of Achaekek, the Mantis
God. His adherents, including the
infamous Red Mantis assassins,
invite or lure deadly mantises close
to their settlements, seeing the
towering creatures as a sign of their
god’s favor. Achaekek’s followers
offer sacrifices of livestock or
captured enemies to keep the
massive insects well fed. Clerics of
Achaekek defend a deadly mantis’s
territory as if it were their own,
believing it to be holy ground.
Mantis, Giant
These monstrously oversized insects are silent predators with lightning-quick
forelegs and a bone-breaking bite.
Giant Mantis
These massive cousins of normal praying mantises stand taller than an average
human. They stalk through dense forests, striking at meals from the trees.
GIANT MANTIS CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +9; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +12, Stealth +12
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 20; Fort +10, Ref +12, Will +7
HP 40
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet, fly 20 feet
Melee [one-action] leg +12 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+5 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] mandibles + 12, Damage 1d12+5 piercing
Deadly Mandibles [reaction] Trigger The giant mantis Grabs a creature with its leg. Effect The mantis
pulls the creature adjacent to it, then makes a mandibles Strike against the creature.
Lunging Strike [two-actions] The giant mantis lunges forward, making a leg Strike with an
extended reach of 20 feet.
Sudden Strike On the first round of combat, creatures that haven’t acted are flat-footed
to the giant mantis.
Deadly Mantis
These gigantic mantids make their homes within deep jungles and
prehistoric forests where they hunt and devour
equally massive prey.
DEADLY MANTIS CREATURE 11
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +20; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +18, Athletics +25, Stealth +22
Str +8, Dex +3, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +3, Cha –2
AC 31; Fort +24, Ref +20, Will +18
HP 220
Speed 50 feet, climb 50 feet
Melee [one-action] mandibles +25 (reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d12+14 piercing
Melee [one-action] leg +24 (agile, reach 20 feet), Damage
2d10+14 piercing plus Grab
Fling [one-action] The deadly mantis flings a grabbed creature into the air, up to 30 feet overhead
and up to 30 feet away from the mantis (the creature takes damage from the fall as
normal). If the flung creature lands on another creature, the creature it lands on takes
the same amount of bludgeoning damage. The creature being landed on
can attempt a DC 31 basic Reflex save.
Leaping Grab [two-actions] The mantis Leaps up to 40 feet vertically and 20 feet
horizontally. At any point during the jump, it can make a leg Strike.
If it hits, it automatically Grabs the target, bringing the creature
along until the end of the jump.
Rending Mandibles [one-action] The mantis makes a mandibles Strike
against a creature it has grabbed. If that Strike hits and
the creature is wearing armor with Hardness 12 or
lower, the armor is broken. This Strike doesn’t
further damage armor that’s already broken.
Sudden Strike As giant mantis.
L-N
235

234
MEDUSA INFILTRATORS
Rumors persist of disguised
medusas acting as prominent
members of criminal organizations
such as the Sczarni in Riddleport and
the Aspis Consortium in Port Peril,
and their kind is known to thrive
in metropolises including Absalom
and Katapesh. Because they are so
widespread, medusas resembling
humans of every major ethnicity can
be found in Avistan and Garund.
Medusa
Monstrous humanoids that resemble humans with snakes instead of hair,
medusas are best known for their petrifying gazes that-if lingered upon-can
permanently transform mortals to stone. Medusas are shrewd and manipulative
adversaries who collect and covet secrets, and who use threats and guile to
exploit the fears of weaker creatures. A medusa may seek out powerful magic
items, use divination magic to discover secret knowledge and unlock forbidden
power, or infiltrate a society to beguile influential politicians. Their ability to
worm their way into powerful organizations makes them natural leaders of
criminal outfits and thieves’ guilds, and their interest in magical phenomena
leads some to pursue careers as oracles who offer to help adventurers find what
they seek-for a price. Of course, if wit and deception proves insufficient, a
medusa can always simply turn rivals into ornate stone decorations with little
more than a glare.
Exceptionally agile and surprisingly hardy, a medusa rarely backs down from
a conflict even when cornered. Many adventurers who thought themselves
readied to resist the effects of a medusa’s gaze have nevertheless fallen to a
medusa, as these creatures are also often deadly archers able to riddle their
foes with venom-coated arrows from a distance. Still, a medusa may
barter for their life if no alternatives remain, and the secrets carried
by these powerful villains often make it more than worth sparing the
monster’s life.
MEDUSA CREATURE 7
LE MEDIUM HUMANOID
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Deception +16, Diplomacy +14, Stealth +16
Str +2, Dex +5, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items +1 composite shortbow (60 arrows), shortsword
AC 25, all-around vision; Fort +15, Ref +16, Will +14
HP 105
Petrifying Gaze (arcane, aura, transmutation, visual) 30 feet. When a creature
ends its turn in the aura, it must attempt a DC 25 Fortitude save. If the
creature fails, it becomes slowed 1 for 1 minute. The medusa can
deactivate or activate this aura by using a single action, which
has the concentrate trait.
Biting Snakes [reaction] Trigger A creature ends its turn
adjacent to the medusa. Effect The medusa makes
a snake fangs Strike against the creature.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +18 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+8 piercing plus
serpent venom
Melee [one-action] snake fangs +16 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+8 piercing plus
serpent venom
Ranged [one-action] composite shortbow +19 (deadly 1d10, magical, propulsive, range
increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+7 piercing plus serpent venom
Focus Gaze [one-action] (arcane, concentrate, incapacitation, transmutation,
visual) The medusa fixes their glare at a creature they can see within
30 feet. The target must immediately attempt a Fortitude save against
the medusa's petrifying gaze. If the creature was already slowed by
petrifying gaze before attempting its save, a failed save causes it to be
petrified permanently. After attempting its save, the creature is then
temporarily immune until the start of the medusa's next turn.
Serpent Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 25 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1
round); Stage 2 2d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
L-N
235

234
MERFOLK’S SECRET
Some sailors claim that merfolk
face a grave threat-a dark
and sinister power capable of
rendering even the most beautiful
merfolk into a degenerate and
mutated wretch. Such stories
often end with claims that the
merfolk, proud and noble as they
seem, are unwitting puppets to
some unknown entity lurking
in the deepest depths of the
seas. Merfolk themselves are
characteristically tight-lipped
about such claims.
Merfolk
Elegant, mysterious, and graceful; all this and more can be said of the merfolk.
These enigmatic people resemble humanoids with delicate features from the waist
up but with the fins and tail of a massive fish from the waist down. Found in
nearly all of Golarion’s oceans, merfolk are as varied in appearance as humans,
their skin ranging from pale to umber and all shades in between, while their
gleaming scales shimmer with the majesty of the sea.
Merfolk Warrior
Merfolk warriors form the bulk of the militias of their vast underwater realms
and meet potential aggressors head-on with uncompromising force.
MERFOLK WARRIOR CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM AQUATIC HUMANOID MERFOLK
Perception +6; low-light vision
Languages Aquan, Common
Skills Athletics +5 (+7 to Swim), Medicine +4
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items trident (2)
AC 18; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +4
HP 19
Speed 5 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] trident +7, Damage 1d8+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] trident +9 (thrown 20 feet), Damage
1d8+2 piercing
Aquatic Dash [two-actions] The merfolk warrior swims and attacks
in one of two patterns. They either Swim twice and Strike
one opponent at the end of their movement, or Swim once and Strike at any point
during their movement.
Merfolk Wavecaller
Merfolk wavecallers use their primal power to call forth allies and defend their
people with deadly magic.
MERFOLK WAVECALLER CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM AQUATIC HUMANOID MERFOLK
Perception +8; low-light vision
Languages Aquan, Common
Skills Athletics +7 (+9 to Swim), Deception +6, Nature +8, Religion +8
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items dagger
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +10
HP 30
Speed 5 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action]dagger +9 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +9 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S),
Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Primal Prepared Spells DC 18, attack +10; 1st charm, heal,
hydraulic push; Cantrips (1st) dancing lights, detect magic,
electric arc, ray of frost, stabilize
Hydraulic Asphyxiation [one-action] (divine, evocation, water); Requirement
The target is fully submerged in water, within 30 feet of the
merfolk wavecaller, and holding its breath. Effect The merfolk wavecaller
commands the tides to crush their foe’s throat, rooting the target in place and
forcing it to choke up precious air. The target must succeed at a DC 18 Fortitude save or
become immobilized for 1 round and immediately lose 1d4 actions' worth of air (or twice
that on a critical failure).
L-N
237

236
CREATIVE MIMICS
The older the mimic, the more
creative its guise, but within
practical limits. For example, a
mimic can appear as a neatly
organized bookshelf with a single
book out of place, a dried-up
cistern with something glittering
at its center, or an inconspicuous
wooden door with a conveniently
placed peephole.
Mimic
Thought to be the result of a failed experiment meant to animate objects or a
sinister alghollthu creation, mimics are clever monsters that can take the form
of common manufactured objects. Mimics are ambush predators and voracious
eaters, surprising their prey through their uncanny ability to mimic the form
of common furniture and miscellany. They remain disguised until unsuspecting
adventurers happen by, then they lash out in ambush.
Mimics possess complex alien minds, and while often cruel and self-serving,
they also enjoy conversation with their prey from time to time. For unknown
reasons, they are especially interested in humanoids. Mimics have a strong dislike
for others of their kind and tend to live alone. A mimic can remain in its alternate
form for an extremely long period of time, sometimes remaining disguised in a
dungeon chamber for decades. Regardless of how long
it waits, the mimic remains vigilant and alert, ready to
strike at any moment.
MIMIC CREATURE 4
N MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +9; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +12, Deception +8, Dwelling Lore +10 (applies only to
the dungeon it lives in)
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
AC 20; Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +9
HP 75
Adhesive The mimic is coated in an adhesive slime. Any creature that
hits the mimic, is hit by the mimic, or otherwise touches
the mimic must succeed at a DC 23 Reflex save or
become grabbed (Escape DC 23). A weapon that hits
the mimic is stuck to the mimic and can
be removed with a successful DC
23 Athletics check (made as a
single action). A mimic can
have any number of objects
or creatures stuck to it at a
time. The mimic can release
a stuck creature or object by
using a single action, and the
adhesive dissolves 1 minute after
the mimic dies, releasing all stuck
objects and creatures.
Object Lesson [reaction] Trigger A
creature touches or physically
interacts with the mimic while the
mimic is transformed using Mimic Object.
Effect The triggering creature is automatically stuck by the
mimic’s adhesive (it receives no save). The mimic then makes
a pseudopod Strike against any creature adjacent to the mimic.
Object Lesson can’t be used again until the mimic escapes and
takes on a new disguise.
Speed 10 feet
Melee [one-action] pseudopod +14, Damage 2d8+4 bludgeoning plus adhesive
Mimic Object [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph) The mimic assumes
the shape of any Medium object. This doesn’t change the mimic’s
texture or overall size but can alter its coloration and visual
appearance. It has an automatic result of 28 on Deception checks
and DCs to pass as the object that it's mimicking.
L-N
237

236
VARIANT MINOTAURS
Most minotaurs are a simple
blend of muscular humanoid and
raging bull, but unusual variants
and unique minotaurs may have
different physical features and
abilities. Great-horned minotaurs
can impale foes if they critically
succeed on a charge, but they do
not have the Hunted Fear ability.
Shaggy minotaurs are covered
in thick hair form head to toe,
allowing them to live in freezing
environments with ease and giving
them resistance to cold damage,
but their hooves are broad and
heavy, making it impossible for
them to charge.
Minotaur
Minotaurs are master hunters that dwell in cunning labyrinths or tangles of
underground caverns meant to disorient and demoralize prey. These monstrous
tormentors delight in the hunt, in the terror caused by closing in on prey, and in
the very moment when the hunted realizes that they have lost the game. Only then
will the minotaur charge in for the kill, cutting foes down with powerful strikes
or impaling them on its sharp horns.
Minotaurs are known to dwell in mazes, but they can also be found hiding in
old ruins and other forgotten corners of the world. In any case, they are solitary
creatures, only rarely sharing territory with others of their kind or even more
powerful beings that have cowed them into service. Everyone else is little more
than prey to be hunted.
MINOTAUR CREATURE 4
CE LARGE HUMANOID
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Jotun
Skills Athletics +14, Intimidation +9, Survival +12
(natural cunning)
Str +6, Dex +0, Con +3, Int –2, Wis +2,
Cha –1
Items greataxe
Natural Cunning A minotaur automatically critically
succeeds at Survival checks to avoid becoming lost
or to find its way, including those from the maze spell.
AC 20; Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +10
HP 70
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] greataxe +14 (reach 10 feet, sweep), Damage 1d12+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] horn +14, Damage 1d8+8 piercing
Axe Swipe [two-actions] The minotaur swings its axe in a wide arc, making greataxe
Strikes against any two foes who are adjacent to each other and within
the minotaur’s reach. The multiple attack penalty does not increase
until after both attacks are resolved.
Hunted Fear [one-action] The minotaur snorts and clomps as it hunts its prey,
inspiring  terror. The minotaur makes an Intimidation check to
Demoralize all living creatures within 60 feet that can hear
the minotaur but not see it. Roll once and apply the result
to all creatures. If the targets are in a maze or similarly
difficult-to-navigate structure, the minotaur gains a +4
circumstance bonus to this check. Creatures that become
frightened as a result also take a –2 circumstance
penalty to Survival checks to avoid getting lost for 1
minute. This use of Demoralize doesn't have the visual
trait. Each target is temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Powerful Charge [two-actions] The minotaur Strides twice, then
makes a horn Strike. If it moved at least 20 feet from its
starting position, the Strike’s damage is increased to 2d8+10.
L-N
239

238
UNDERGROUND MOONS
Mu spores dwell in vast caverns,
their pallid underbellies glowing
softly to give the eerie impression
of a strangely shaped “moon”
adrift near the darkened ceiling
so far above. Caverns can be
faintly lit by this illumination-an
unnerving sight for any traveler
not expecting light in such a
lightless realm.
Mu Spore
A mu spore is a thankfully rare fungoid monstrosity of vast power and strange
intellect. Even the smallest mu spores are never less than a hundred feet long from
tentacle tip to tentacle tip, yet despite this vast bulk, they are capable of flying
with an uncommon grace, venting jets of foul-smelling spores to guide their flight.
Many societies tell tales of vast mu spores appearing over cities at the dawn of
apocalyptic events, but they’re more than just ravenous eaters of nations. Mu spores
often possess rare or esoteric knowledge, and if peaceful contact can be made, this
lore can be quite valuable. Their spores can also be used to craft certain foul drugs
or deadly alchemical poisons, but harvesting these ingredients is dangerous, as the
spores are not viable for long once they’ve been shed, forcing alchemists seeking to
harvest them to operate in perilously close proximity to the abominations.
MU SPORE CREATURE 21
CN GARGANTUAN FUNGUS
Perception +36; low-light vision, windsense 240 feet
Languages Aklo, Common, Terran, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +26, Athletics +41, Nature +38, Occultism +36
Str +10, Dex +3, Con +9, Int +4, Wis +9, Cha +9
Windsense The mu spore senses vibrations in the air through its aerial spores.
AC 45; Fort +38, Ref +32, Will +38
HP 350, regeneration 50 (deactivated by sonic); Resistances acid 20, all (except sonic) 10
Enormous A mu spore is a massive creature and takes up a space of 10 squares by 10
squares (50 feet by 50 feet).
Spores (aura) 60 feet. A living creature that enters the area or ends its turn within it
is corrupted by spores. It must succeed at a DC 42 Fortitude save or be clumsy 1,
enfeebled 1, and slowed 1 for 1 round. Fungi and plants are immune.
Grasping Tendrils [free-action] Trigger A creature within 10 feet of the mu spore moves or attacks
the mu spore. Effect The spore uses Grab on the triggering creature. There is no limit
to how many creatures it can grab with the sticky tendrils that cover its body.
Speed 40 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +40 (deadly 3d12, reach 30 feet),
Damage 4d12+18 piercing plus Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] tentacle +40 (agile, reach 100 feet), Damage 4d10+18
bludgeoning plus Improved Grab
Cough Spores [two-actions] The mu spore releases a
cloud of burrowing spores in a 400-foot cone.
The spores deal 22d6 piercing damage to all
creatures, objects, and wooden structures in the
area, but not to plants or fungi (DC 46 basic Reflex
save). The mu spore can’t use this ability again for
1d4 rounds.
Enormous Inhalation [two-actions] The mu spore pulls all creatures
and objects in a 400-foot cone 400 feet toward its mouth. A
successful DC 43 Fortitude save halves the distance, or avoids
the pull on a critical success. The mu spore automatically
attempts to Swallow Whole each creature adjacent to it at
the end of the inhalation.
Fast Swallow [reaction] Trigger The mu spore Grabs a
creature with its jaws. Effect The spore uses
Swallow Whole.
Greater Constrict [one-action] 15 bludgeoning, DC 45
Overpowering Jaws The mu spore still deals 18
piercing damage if its jaws Strike is a failure
(but not on a critical failure).
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Gargantuan,
20d6+9 acid, Rupture 37
L-N
239

238
FROM A GODʼS
NIGHTMARES
The first mukradis are rumored
to have spawned in the fevered
nightmares of a sleeping demigod
from a dimension beyond dreams,
who perished as the first mukradis
hollowed out its unconscious mind
and used its flesh to transition into
the mortal realm. This legend is
likely nothing more than fancy, but
it certainly speaks to the deadly
nature of these immense monsters.
Mukradi
Fearsome centipede-like creatures, mukradis are three-headed predators with a
devastating array of breath weapons. A Darklands version of the mukradi is rumored
to exist. It’s said these variant mukradis have black scales, and all of their heads spew
a black, acidic goo that animates before being reabsorbed by the mukradis.
MUKRADI CREATURE 15
N GARGANTUAN BEAST
Perception +24; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Athletics +32
Str +9, Dex +0, Con +7, Int –3, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 37, all-around vision; Fort +32, Ref +23, Will +26
HP 300; Resistances acid 20, electricity 20, fire 20
Partitioned Anatomy [free-action] Trigger The mukradi would be confused, paralyzed, slowed, or
stunned. Effect The mukradi confines the debilitating effect to a certain portion of its
nervous system, ignoring the effect but causing a maw of its choice to go dormant for
the effect’s duration. That maw can’t be used for a Strike or Breath Weapon during that
time. This ability can’t be used if all the mukradi’s heads are dormant.
Spitting Rage [reaction] Trigger A creature scores a critical hit on the mukradi. Effect The
mukradi’s Breath Weapon recharges. It can use its Breath Weapon immediately
as part of this reaction. It canʼt use this reaction again until it recharges its Breath
Weapon naturally.
Speed 60 feet, burrow 60 feet, climb 60 feet
Melee [one-action] acid maw +32 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+17 piercing plus 3d6 acid
Melee [one-action] flame maw +32 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+17 piercing plus 3d6 fire
Melee [one-action] shock maw +32 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 2d12+17 piercing plus
3d6 electricity
Melee [one-action] leg +32 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+17 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail lash +32 (magical, reach 30 feet), Damage 3d10+17 slashing plus Knockdown
Breath Weapon[two-actions](evocation, primal) The mukradi breathes a blast of energy from
one of its three heads; each creature in the area must attempt a DC 36 basic
Reflex save. The mukradi can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
• Acid Maw (acid) 10-foot-wide, 60-foot line of acid dealing 16d6
acid damage.
• Flame Maw (fire) 60-foot cone of fire dealing 16d6 fire damage.
• Shock Maw (electricity) 120-foot line of electricity dealing
16d6 electricity damage.
Pull Apart[two-actions]The mukradi makes two Strikes with different
maws against the same target. If both hit, the target takes
an extra 2d12+13 slashing damage, with a DC 36 basic
Fortitude save. On a critical failure, the creature
is torn to pieces and dies. The mukradiʼs
multiple attack penalty increases
only after all the attacks are made.
Thrash [two-actions] The mukradi Strikes
once against each creature in its
reach. It can Strike up to once with
each maw, once with its tail lash,
and any number of times with its legs.
Each attack takes a –2 circumstance
penalty and counts toward the
mukradi's multiple attack penalty,
but the multiple attack penalty
doesn’t increase until after all
the attacks are made.
Trample [three-actions] Huge or
smaller, leg, DC 36
L-N
241

240
ASSOCIATED MONSTERS
A mummy guardian might serve
alongside a mummy pharaoh or
with zombies, skeletons, animated
objects, or any other undead or
constructs that might be found in
their tomb lairs.
Mummy
While many cultures practice mummification of the dead for benign reasons,
undead mummies are created through foul rituals, typically to provide eternally
vigilant guardians.
Mummy Guardian
The majority of mummies were created by cruel and selfish masters to serve as
guardians to protect their tombs from intruders. The traditional method of creating
a mummy guardian is a laborious and sadistic process that begins well before the
poor soul to be transformed is dead, during which the victim is ritualistically
starved of nourishing food and instead fed strange spices, preservative agents,
and toxins intended to quicken the desiccation of the flesh. The victim remains
immobile but painfully aware during the final stages, where its now-useless entrails
are extracted before it’s shrouded in funerary wrappings and entombed within a
necromantically ensorcelled sarcophagus to await intrusions in
the potentially distant future. While it’s certainly possible
to use other methods to create a mummy guardian from
an already-deceased body, those who seek to create these
foul undead as their guardians in the afterlife often feel
that such methods result in inferior undead-the pain and
agony of death by mummification being an essential step in
the process.
Regardless of the method of their creation, mummy guardians are
more than just physical shells of flesh and bone-they retain fragmented,
distorted versions of their minds, with only enough memories of their
living personality remaining to fuel their undead anger and jealousy of
those who yet live. This burning rage only intensifies over the centuries of
waiting within a crypt for the chance to actually act, and thus when most mummy
guardians are awoken by tomb robbers or adventurers, they stop at nothing in
pursuit of glorious slaughter.
MUMMY GUARDIAN CREATURE 6
LE MEDIUM MUMMY UNDEAD
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Necril, plus any one ancient language
Skills Athletics +15, Stealth +11
Str +4, Dex +0, Con +2, Int –2, Wis +4, Cha +2
AC 23; Fort +14, Ref +10, Will +16
HP 110, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Weaknesses fire 5
Despair (aura, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, incapacitation, mental) 30 feet. Living
creatures are frightened 1 while in a mummy guardian’s despair aura. They can’t
naturally recover from this fear while in the area but recover instantly once they
leave the area. When a creature first enters the area, it must succeed at a DC 22 Will
save (after taking the penalty from being frightened) or be paralyzed for 1 round. The
creature is then temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +16, Damage 2d6+7 bludgeoning plus mummy rot
Mummy Rot (curse, disease, divine, necromancy, negative) This disease and any
damage from it can’t be healed until this curse is removed. A creature killed by
mummy rot turns to dust and can’t be resurrected except by a 7th-level resurrect
ritual or similar magic. Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no ill
effect (1 minute); Stage 2 4d6 negative damage and stupefied 1 (1 day)
Mummy Pharaoh
While mummy guardians are undead crafted from the corpses of
sacrificed-usually unwilling victims-and retain only fragments of their 
L-N
241

240
ASSOCIATED MONSTERS
A mummy pharaoh often
commands lesser undead,
typically mummy guardians and
whatever other nearby creatures
of its old kingdom it can bully
into subservience.
memories, a mummy pharaoh is the result of a deliberate embrace of undeath by
a sadistic and cruel ruler. The transformation from life to undeath is no less awful
and painful, but as the transition is an intentional bid to escape death by a powerful
personality who fully embraces the blasphemous repercussions of the choice, the
mummy pharaoh retains its memories and personality intact. Although in most
cases a mummy pharaoh is formed from a particularly depraved ruler instructing
their priests to perform complex rituals that grant the ruler eternal unlife, a ruler
who was filled with incredible anger in life might spontaneously arise from death as
a mummy pharaoh without undergoing this ritual. Depending on the nature of the
ruler, a mummy pharaoh might have spellcasting or other class features instead of its
Attack of Opportunity and disruptive abilities-the exact nature of the abilities the
ruler had in life can significantly change or strengthen the mummy pharaoh presented
here (which represents the least powerful variety of this deadly undead foe).
MUMMY PHARAOH CREATURE 9
RARE LE MEDIUM MUMMY UNDEAD
Perception +20; darkvision
Languages Necril, plus any two ancient languages
Skills Deception +18, Intimidation +20, Occultism +15,
Religion +20, Stealth +13
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +5, Cha +5
Items +1 striking longspear
AC 27; Fort +19, Ref +15, Will +20; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 165, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Weaknesses fire 10
Great Despair (aura, divine, emotion, enchantment, fear, incapacitation,
mental) 30 feet. As the mummy guardian’s despair, except the DC is
26 and the paralysis lasts 1d4 rounds.
Rejuvenation (divine, necromancy) When a mummy pharaoh is destroyed,
necromantic energies rebuild its body in its tomb over 1d10 days. If the
re-forming body is destroyed during that time, the process starts anew. A slain
mummy pharaoh can be destroyed for good with a consecrate ritual.
Undead Mastery (aura, divine, necromancy) 100 feet. Commanded or allied undead in
the aura that have a lower level than the mummy pharaoh gain a +1 circumstance
bonus to attack rolls, damage rolls, AC, saves, and skill checks.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] The mummy pharaoh can use Attack of Opportunity when
a creature within its reach uses a concentrate action, in addition to its normal
trigger. It can disrupt triggering concentrate actions, and it disrupts actions on
any hit, not just a critical hit.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +20 (agile), Damage 1d10+11 bludgeoning plus insidious
mummy rot
Melee [one-action] longspear +21 (magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+11 piercing
plus insidious mummy rot
Channel Rot (divine, necromancy) The mummy pharaoh can deliver insidious
mummy rot through melee weapons it wields.
Insidious Mummy Rot (curse, disease, divine, necromancy); This disease and
any damage from it can’t be healed until this curse is removed. A creature
killed by insidious mummy rot turns to sand and can’t be resurrected
except by a 7th-level resurrect ritual or similar magic. Saving Throw
DC 26 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect (1 minute); Stage 2 8d6
negative damage and stupefied 2 (1 day)
Sandstorm Wrath [two-actions](concentrate, divine, evocation, fire) The mummy
pharaoh exhales a 60-foot cone of superheated sand that deals
5d6 fire and 5d6 slashing damage (DC 28 basic Reflex save).
The mummy pharaoh can’t use Sandstorm Wrath again for
1d4 rounds.
L-N
243

242
NAGAS AND OTHERS
Dark nagas might rule over goblins
(page 180), orcs (page 256),
xulgaths (page 336), or decadent
folk, especially corrupt aristocrats.
Guardian nagas might be found
with other goodly creatures of any
sort, from fey in natural sites to
constructs in ancient vaults.
Naga
Nagas are serpentine beings with magical powers and keen, nearly inscrutable
intellects. Physically, they resemble massive snakes with eerie visages that resemble
those of humans. Nagas use their innate magic and poisonous fangs to keep all
but the most stalwart foes at bay. Beyond the natural weapons they use to ward
away foes, little is understood of the naga’s unsettling physiology.
Nagas are intelligent creatures with powerful needs to pursue, be they the
accumulation of knowledge, the collection of rare art, or the rule of an entire
nation. On Golarion, the nation of Nagajor is one such society-an entire empire
ruled by nagas and populated by reptilian humanoids who serve their naga rulers
with a patriotic pride that borders on worship.
Still, most adventurers interact with nagas on a much smaller scale, encountering
them as dangerous guardians in remote locations or not-so-abandoned ruins.
In many cases, these nagas have heard of distant Nagajor, but they are usually
unwilling to abandon their own pursuits to seek out a land where they might be
worshipped as gods.
Dark Naga
Dark nagas are wicked, jealous creatures that crave power and wealth. Indeed,
the dark naga sees such ideals as spiritual expressions of an essential truth: if
one can take something, that something is theirs to have. The dark naga sees
other creatures as lessers worthy only of subjugation or as rivals who must
be eliminated.
Dark nagas dwell in remote places other creatures have forsaken,
searching abandoned ruins for wealth and potent magic items. Those
unlucky trespassers into a dark naga’s lair typically find themselves as
the naga’s slaves or playthings, put to sleep with the monster’s poison or
incinerated by its deadly magic. Some dark nagas are more disposed
toward socializing than others; in these cases, they may become
wicked despots who rule over enclaves of captive or unsuspecting
subjects. Subtler dark nagas, especially those who crave finer
luxuries, dwell in or under the wealthy settlements and use their
wiles to garner a decadent following, forming something
akin to a cult with the naga as the jewelry-bedecked object
of worship.
DARK NAGA CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON LE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +15; mind reading 30 feet, darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common
Skills Acrobatics +17, Arcana +16, Athletics +13, Deception +16,
Intimidation +16, Stealth +19
Str +2, Dex +6, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 27; Fort +15, Ref +17, Will +15; guarded thoughts
HP 115
Guarded Thoughts (abjuration, occult) Dark nagas are immune to
any form of mind reading.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +19 (agile, finesse), Damage 2d8+5 piercing plus
dark naga venom
Arcane Spontaneous Spells DC 26, attack +18; 4th (3 slots) blink,
wall of fire; 3rd (4 slots) dispel magic, haste, lightning bolt; 2nd
(4  slots) illusory creature, invisibility, magic missile; 1st (4 slots)
feather fall, illusory object, longstrider; Cantrips (4th) daze,
detect magic, mage hand, read aura, shield
Occult Innate Spells DC 25; Constant (3rd) mind reading
Dark Naga Venom (incapacitation, poison) Saving Throw
L-N
243

242
OTHER NAGAS
Beyond the sinister dark naga
and the benevolent guardian
naga, many other types of nagas
exist, including the mesmerizing
spirit naga, the multiheaded royal
naga, and the introspective and
mysterious lunar naga.
DC  25 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 5 minutes; Stage 1 slowed  1 (1 round);
Stage 2 slowed 2 (1 round); Stage 3 unconscious with no Perception check to
wake up (1d4+1 minutes)
Guardian Naga
The opposite of dark nagas in many ways, guardian nagas are benevolent and
wise protectors of places of great natural or supernatural significance: ancient
oak groves, forgotten holy temples, and vaults of sacred power are just a few
examples of locations that these nagas protect. Guardian nagas believe that the
beautiful elements of the cosmos are worthy of protection and that devotion to
such a grand effort is its own reward. A guardian naga may join a group with
similar values, such as a sect of priests or monks, to aid it in its holy endeavors
and to exchange knowledge of the heavens.
Guardian nagas usually encourage their young, upon reaching adulthood,
to depart the nest and seek out their own natural wonders or ancient ruins to
protect. Sometimes generations of guardian nagas might guard the same place,
passing the honor of such care from parent to child. In such cases, the parent
nagas aim to have at least one of their children elect to stay behind and become
the guardian of their ancestral ward, giving the parents the peace of mind that the
site they protect will continue to be guarded by their descendants.
It is difficult for many societies that vilify serpents or see them as symbols of
evil to accept the fact that guardian nagas are benevolent and kindly. Fortunately
for these people, guardian nagas are also patient and understanding, and see
encounters with such societies as opportunities to educate and
expand worldviews.
GUARDIAN NAGA CREATURE 10
UNCOMMON LG LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +22; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common
Skills Acrobatics +22, Deception +18, Diplomacy +21, Heaven Lore +21,
Stealth +20
Str +5, Dex +6, Con +5, Int +3, Wis +5, Cha +4
AC 31; Fort +20, Ref +21, Will +22
HP 175
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +22 (agile,
finesse), Damage 2d8+8
piercing plus guardian
naga venom
Ranged [one-action] spit +22 (agile,
poison, range increment
30 feet), Effect guardian naga venom
Divine Spontaneous Spells DC 29, attack +21; 5th
(4 slots) breath of life, death ward, flame strike,
heal; 4th (4 slots) air walk, freedom of
movement, remove curse, restoration;
3rd (4 slots) dispel magic, neutralize
poison, remove disease, searing
light; 2nd (4 slots) calm emotions,
restoration, see invisibility, sound burst;
1st (4 slots) bless, heal, protection, spirit link;
Cantrips (5th) daze, detect magic, light, mage hand, ray of frost,
read aura, stabilize
Guardian Naga Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 29 Fortitude;
Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 3d6 poison (1 round); Stage
2 3d6 poison and drained 1 (1 round)
L-N
245

244
NIGHTMARE STEEDS
Nightmares allow only the evilest
of creatures to ride them and are
willing partners in destruction
those creatures inflict. Night hags
are particularly well known to
associate with nightmares.
Nightmare
Nightmares are flaming equine harbingers of death.
NIGHTMARE CREATURE 6
NE LARGE BEAST FIEND
Perception +14; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Daemonic, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +16, Intimidation +14, Survival +12
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +4, Cha +2
Smoke (aura) 15 feet. The nightmare continually exhales black smoke that creates
concealment in an aura around it. Nightmares and their riders can see through
this smoke. A creature that begins its turn in the area becomes sickened 2 (DC 23
Fortitude negates) and is then temporarily immune sickness from the smoke
for 1 minute. The nightmare, its rider, any creature currently holding
its breath (or that does not need to breathe), and any creature
immune to poison are immune to the aura’s sickened effect but
not the concealment.
AC 24; Fort +15, Ref +15, Will +12
HP 100; Resistances fire 10
Speed 40 feet, fly 90 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +16 (evil, magical), Damage 2d10+6 piercing plus
1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] hoof +16 (agile, evil, fire, magical), Damage
1d8+6 bludgeoning plus 1d6 evil and 1d8 fire
Divine Innate Spells DC 24; 7th plane shift (self and
rider only)
Flaming Gallop [two-actions] (fire) The nightmare
Strides or Flies up to triple its Speed.
Its hooves burst with intense
flame, dealing 3d6 fire damage
(DC 24 basic Reflex save) once
to each creature other than
the nightmare’s rider that the
nightmare moves adjacent to during its gallop.
Greater Nightmare
The enormous greater nightmare is a more dangerous variety
of nightmare, particularly valued for its ability to invade
other realities with its rider.
GREATER NIGHTMARE CREATURE 11
NE HUGE BEAST FIEND
Perception +22; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Daemonic, Infernal
Skills Acrobatics +23, Athletics +24, Intimidation +22, Survival +20
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +2, Wis +5, Cha +3
Smoke (aura) 20 feet. As nightmare, but DC 28.
AC 31; Fort +25, Ref +24, Will +21
HP 200; Resistances fire 15
Speed 60 feet, fly 120 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +24 (evil, magical), Damage 2d10+11 piercing plus 1d6 evil
Melee [one-action] hoof +24 (agile, evil, fire, magical), Damage 1d8+11 bludgeoning plus
1d6 evil and 2d8 fire
Divine Innate Spells DC 30; 7th ethereal jaunt (self and rider only), plane
shift (self and rider only)
Flaming Gallop [two-actions] (fire) As nightmare, but 6d6 fire damage and DC 30.
Trample [three-actions] Large or smaller, hoof, DC 30
L-N
245

244
FROM THE DREAMLANDS
The nilith’s association with the
remote and little-understood
Dreamlands, also known as the
Dimension of Dreams, is unusual.
They draw power from a latent
dreaming connection to that
realm, but they are native to the
Material Plane.
Nilith
The sleek, dark niliths resemble hairless, emaciated tree sloths. These creatures
are intensely dangerous and fearsome, with red glowing eyes, wicked claws, and
mouths full of needlelike teeth. Niliths feed off the emotions, fears, and flesh of
the living, and folktales posit that those who have nightmares of these creatures
are fated to one day be eaten by them. Niliths draw intense joy from tormenting
sapient creatures, often focusing their predations on the pious and the just, from
whom they draw forth their most basic fears and worst thoughts and revel in their
victims’ subsequent terror. More often than not, these despicable manipulators
wish to drive their victims into madness and even to suicide. Most niliths lack the
patience to spend too much time fully tearing down an individual, and when a
nilith tires of its current plaything and becomes bored with its particular thoughts
and fears, it murders the quarry before feeding on its flesh and moving onto the
next victim.
Niliths are actually extensions of much deadlier creatures that dwell in a distant
dimension beyond dreams-in a way, niliths are little more than remote feeding
machines for the unknown alien entities to which they are connected. Scholars
and dimensional travelers have attempted to uncover the exact mechanisms of
this mysterious connection, but they have yet to decipher the truth. Indeed, many
who investigate the nature of the nilith’s bond are driven to madness before
getting anywhere close. The odd connection to otherworldly beings might help
explain the longevity of these creatures, as it is believed that niliths can live for
thousands of years.
Thankfully for others, niliths are solitary creatures that hate the company of
their own kind, likely because these harbingers of nightmares have no wish to
taste the horrors they bring to others.
NILITH CREATURE 10
NE MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common; telepathy 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +21, Athletics +17, Intimidation +23,
Occultism +19, Stealth +21, Survival +17
Str +3, Dex +5, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +5
AC 32; Fort +17, Ref +20, Will +20
HP 150; Resistances mental 10, physical 5
(except silver)
Speed 25 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile, finesse, magical),
Damage 2d10+9 slashing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] fangs +23 (finesse, magical),
Damage 2d12+9 piercing
Occult Innate Spells DC 29; 5th
hallucination, mind probe; 4th blink,
confusion, crushing despair, dream
message, invisibility (at will, self only),
nightmare; 3rd mind reading (at will);
Cantrips (5th) mage hand, message, read
aura, shield
Mind Crush [one-action] (enchantment, mental, occult);
Requirements The nilith has a creature grabbed.
Effect The nilith reaches into the mind of the grabbed
creature and implants disjointed images of the victim’s
worst fears and nightmares. The grabbed creature takes 6d6
mental damage (DC 31 basic Will save). On a critical failure, the target is also
affected as though by feeblemind, and it must attempt a second Will save against
that effect.
L-N
247

246
INSPIRATIONS FOR ART
Nymphs are living manifestations
of beauty and grace, and as such
they are often the subjects of
art-sculpture and paintings in
particular. Promising a nymph
to immortalize them in a work
of art can be an excellent way to
secure that nymph’s favor, but one
should take care to ensure that the
nymph admires and is proud of the
artistic effort’s final result, lest the
nymph be insulted and lash out
with her powerful magic.
Nymph
Nymphs are a family of fey that take the form of beautiful humanoids with elven
features and have a deep association with the natural world. The most common
of their kind are the dryads, which are spirits that embody great trees, but many
other kinds of nymphs exist, including naiads, who watch over bodies of water. All
nymphs are guardians of some element of nature, typically a specific tree or pond,
or even-in the case of nymph queens-whole forests or massive bodies of water.
Naiad
Naiads protect streams, ponds, springs, and other natural bodies of fresh water. While
most naiads lead solitary lives close to their chosen ward, sometimes these nymphs
congregate in coven-like groups where river tributaries meet, performing great magic
and blessing the waters of the land. Because naiads’ bonds to their bodies of water
permit more flexibility, they are the nymphs most likely to interact with humanoids
and even visit their settlements on occasion. Unlike other nymphs, naiads occasionally
become adventurers, especially when dark forces seek to despoil nature or otherwise
threaten the land, joining forces with others to prevent the corruption of nature.
NAIAD CREATURE 1
CG MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS FEY NYMPH WATER
Perception +6; low-light vision
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan; speak with animals
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +3, Diplomacy +7, Nature +6, Stealth +6, Survival +4
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +4
Wild Empathy The naiad can use Diplomacy to Make an Impression on and make very
simple Requests of animals.
AC 16; Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +8
HP 20; Weaknesses cold iron 3; Resistances fire 3
Water Dependent A naiad bonds to a spring, pool, pond, or similar-sized water feature.
While within 300 feet of her bonded body of water, she can use her innate tidal surge
at will. She doesn’t recover Hit Points or reduce the drained condition when resting
beyond that range. Unlike most other nymphs, she doesn’t suffer penalties from being
apart from her bonded body of water. A naiad can perform a 24-hour ritual to bond
herself to a new body of water.
Speed 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] aqueous fist +8 (agile, finesse, magical, water), Damage 1d6 bludgeoning
Primal Innate Spells DC 17; 1st charm, create water, tidal surge (Core Rulebook 397);
Constant (2nd) speak with animals
Water Healing [two-actions] (concentrate, healing, necromancy, primal) While within her bonded
body of water (see water dependent above), the naiad heals 1 Hit Point every 10 minutes.
Dryad
Dryads are fey guardians of the trees and creatures who dwell in wooded areas.
They prefer using indirect methods to dissuade those who would harm their sacred
groves and beloved forests, but they are not above using enchantments to enlist
the aid of allies when evil threats cannot be dissuaded with words alone. In times
of peace, dryads happily live secluded lives inside their trees, and a community at
harmony with nature might not even realize a dryad lives nearby.
Though they watch over all the woods around them, dryads are inextricably tied
to a specific tree, usually an oak. Dryads who are bonded to another type of tree
are fundamentally the same, but they may differ in temperament and appearance to
match their ward. For instance, kraneiai, or cherry-tree dryads, have beautiful pink
coloration and concern themselves with the fragile beauty of life.
DRYAD CREATURE 3
CG MEDIUM FEY NYMPH PLANT
Perception +10; low-light vision
L-N
247

246
NYMPH LOCATIONS
Nymphs tend to be closely
associated with specific areas of
natural splendor and beauty-
woodlands for dryads, rivers for
naiads. Areas where nymphs
dwell always look more pristine,
breathtaking, and scenic than they
would otherwise.
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan; speak with plants
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +5, Crafting +7 (+9 woodworking), Diplomacy +9,
Nature +13, Stealth +9, Survival +12
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +4
Nature Empathy The dryad can use Diplomacy to Make an Impression on and make very
simple Requests of animals and plants.
AC 19; Fort +6, Ref +11, Will +10
HP 55; Weaknesses cold iron 5, fire 5
Tree Dependent A dryad is mystically bonded to a single great tree and must remain
within 300 feet of it. If she moves beyond that range, she becomes sickened 1 and is
unable to recover. She must attempt a DC 18 Fortitude save every hour or increase
the sickened value by 1 (to a maximum of sickened 4). After 24 hours, she becomes
drained 1, with this value increasing by 1 every additional 24 hours. A dryad can
perform a 24-hour ritual to bond herself to a new tree.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] branch +12 (finesse, magical), Damage 1d12+2 bludgeoning
Primal Innate Spells DC 21, attack +11; 5th tree stride (×2); 4th charm (×3), suggestion;
3rd sleep; 2nd entangle (at will), tree shape (at will); Cantrips
(2nd) tanglefoot; Constant (4th) speak with plants
Tree Meld [two-actions] (primal, transmutation) The dryad touches a tree of
enough volume to contain her and merges into it for as long as she
wishes. She can Cast a Spell while inside as long as the spell doesn’t
require a line of effect outside the tree. She can hear, but not
see, what’s going on outside the tree. She can
Dismiss this effect.
Significant physical damage dealt to the
tree expels the dryad from the tree and deals
3d6 damage to her. Passwall expels the dryad
without dealing damage.
If a dryad uses this ability on her bonded tree, she instead enters an
extradimensional living space within the tree; Tree Meld gains the
extradimensional trait. A dryad can bring up to two other creatures
with her when entering her home within her bonded tree. The dryad
can still be expelled from this space as above.
Nymph Queens
Nymph queens are powerful nymphs that rule over entire regions of
untouched wilderness, not just single trees or ponds. Every variety of
nymph can have a queen. Naiad queens are among the most prominent, and
more often interact with nearby mortals. Thus, some scholars refer to naiad
queens as simply “nymphs.”
Nymph Queen Abilities
A nymph queen is 6 to 10 levels higher than an ordinary nymph of the same
type, with enhanced numerical statistics and improved Strikes to match. A nymph
queen’s ward is a significant region, and she strengthens and vivifies this territory
with her presence. Nymph queens are not dependent on their wards and lose the
corresponding ability (such as a dryad’s tree dependent ability); instead, they gain
the tied to the land ability, as described below. A nymph queen also gains the
nymph’s beauty aura and the Focus Beauty action, which have varying effects based
on the queen’s original type. She gains the Inspiration ability, allowing her to bestow
a gift of inspiration on those who catch her fancy, and the Change Shape ability to
change her form. Finally, she gains primal prepared spells as a druid of her level.
Change Shape [one-action] (polymorph, primal, transmutation) Nymph queens can transform
between their original form, which looks much like a typical nymph of their kind, and
any Small or Medium humanoid form, typically choosing a more humanoid-looking
version of their natural form.
L-N
249

248
OTHER NYMPHS
Naiads and dryads are the most wellknown nymphs, but others exist as
well. Hesperides, for example, are
wards of the sunset and golden light
and can be encountered dwelling on
coastal cliffsides or remote islands.
Lampads, on the other hand, are
dark, moody nymphs found in
wondrous, crystal-lined caverns
deep underground.
Focus Beauty [one-action] (emotion, enchantment, mental, primal, visual) The nymph queen
focuses her beauty upon a target within her aura. The creature must attempt a
Will save. On a failure, it is affected as if by the nymph queen’s nymph’s beauty
aura; if it was already affected by the aura, it suffers a greater effect described in
the nymph queen’s entry. A nymph queen can Focus Beauty on a given creature
only once per turn.
Inspiration [three-actions](emotion, enchantment, mental, primal) A nymph queen can inspire a
single intelligent creature by giving that creature a token of her favor, typically a lock
of her hair. As long as the creature carries her token and remains in good standing
with the nymph queen, the creature gains a +1 status bonus to all Crafting checks,
Performance checks, and Will saves.
If a nymph queen grants her Inspiration to a bard and the nymph queen is that bard’s
muse, the bard gains an additional benefit depending on their muse theme: for lore muse,
the bard also gains a +1 status bonus to all Lore checks; for maestro muse, the status
bonus to Performance checks increases to +2 for the purpose of determining the effects
of compositions; for polymath muse, the bard gains a +4 status bonus to untrained skill
checks; and for all other muses, the Will save bonus increases to +2 against fey.
Nymph’s Beauty (aura, emotion, enchantment, mental, primal, visual) 30 feet. Creatures
that start their turn in the aura must succeed at a Will save or suffer an effect
described in the nymph queen’s entry.
Tied to the Land A nymph queen is intrinsically tied to a specific region, such as a forest
for a dryad queen. As long as the queen is healthy, the environment is exceptionally
resilient, allowing the nymph queen to automatically attempt to counteract spells and
rituals such as blight that would harm the environment, using her Spell DC with a
counteract level equal to the highest-level druid spell she can cast. When the nymph
queen becomes physically or psychologically unhealthy, however, her warded region
eventually becomes twisted or unhealthy as well. In that case, restoring the nymph
queen swiftly heals the entire region.
Naiad Queen
Naiad queens rule over pristine wildernesses centered on untouched lakes or other
bodies of fresh water. Bards’ songs and artists’ paintings of nymphs tend to depict
naiad queens in their slightly more humanoid forms, which they don when they
make the rare journey into civilized lands to garner allies or gauge threats.
Most naiad queens treat those who respect their domains with kindness, but
they are fierce and quick in eliminating foes. Their blinding beauty and breadth of
offensive spells make naiad queens fierce opponents if forced into a fight.
NAIAD QUEEN CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON CG MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS FEY NYMPH WATER
Perception +18; low-light vision, speak with animals
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +16, Athletics +9 (+13 to Swim), Diplomacy +20, Medicine +15, Nature
+15, Performance +20, Stealth +14, Survival +15
Str +0, Dex +5, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +4, Cha +7
Tied to the Land
Wild Empathy As naiad
AC 26; Fort +15, Ref +18, Will +17
HP 100; Weaknesses cold iron 10; Resistances fire 10
Nymph’s Beauty (aura, emotion, enchantment, mental, primal, visual) 30 feet. DC 23. On a
failed save, the target is stunned 1 for this turn and whenever it begins its turn within 30
feet of the naiad queen for the next 24 hours, even if it can’t see her on subsequent turns.
Speed 25 feet, swim 25 feet
Melee [one-action] aqueous fist +17 (agile, finesse, magical, water), Damage 2d6+6 bludgeoning
Primal Prepared Spells DC 28, attack +18; 4th heal, summon animal; 3rd earth bind,
haste, heal; 2nd animal messenger, faerie fire, tree shape; 1st fleet step, gust of wind,
negate aroma; Cantrips (4th) detect magic, guidance, light, ray of frost, stabilize 
L-N
249

248
NYMPH TREASURES
Nymphs sometimes carry magical
trinkets or wear enchanted clothing
or jewelry, but the greatest treasure
a nymph queen can share is often her
inspiration to those seeking a muse.
Primal Innate Spells DC 28; 4th tidal surge (at will; Core Rulebook 397); 1st charm,
create water
Change Shape [one-action] (polymorph, primal, transmutation)
Focus Beauty [one-action] (emotion, enchantment, incapacitation, mental, primal, visual) On a failed
save, if the target was already affected by the naiad queen’s beauty, the image of the
queen sears into the creature’s mind, allowing no further sight and effectively blinding
the creature until restored via restore senses or a similar effect, or until the naiad queen
chooses to remove the effect using a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
Inspiration [three-actions] (emotion, enchantment, mental, primal)
Water Healing [two-actions] (concentrate, healing, necromancy, primal) As naiad, but the naiad
queen can heal in any body of water in her domain and regains 28 HP.
Dryad Queen (Hamadryad)
Hamadryads rule over an entire forest, or a portion of an incredibly large
forest, leading and protecting all dryads within. Hamadryads often have
strange relationships with powerful and deadly fey, working together
in a dualistic way despite their differences, with the
hamadryad representing nature’s wonders and the other
fey representing nature’s wrath.
DRYAD QUEEN CREATURE 13
UNCOMMON CG MEDIUM FEY NYMPH PLANT
Perception +25; low-light vision
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan; speak with plants
Skills Acrobatics +25, Athletics +19, Crafting +23 (+25
woodworking), Deception +30, Diplomacy +30, Intimidation
+27, Nature +24, Performance +28, Stealth +25, Survival +24
Str +2, Dex +6, Con +6, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +8
Nature Empathy As dryad.
Tied to the Land
AC 35; Fort +24, Ref +26, Will +24
HP 220; Weaknesses cold iron 10, fire 10
Nymph’s Beauty (aura, emotion, enchantment, incapacitation, mental, primal,
visual) DC 30. On a failed save, the target is immobilized in awe for 1 minute.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] branch +27 (finesse, magical), Damage 3d12+8
bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] leaves +27 (conjuration, plant, primal, range increment 60 feet),
Damage 3d8+6 slashing
Primal Prepared Spells DC 35, attack +25; 7th regenerate, summon plant
or fungus; 6th baleful polymorph, chain lightning, tangling creepers;
5th cone of cold, death ward, heal; 4th fly, resist energy, stoneskin;
3rd earthbind, haste, wall of thorns; 2nd animal messenger, faerie
fire, remove fear; 1st fleet step, gust of wind, negate aroma; Cantrips
(7th) detect magic, guidance, light, ray of frost, stabilize
Primal Innate Spells DC 35, attack +25; 8th impaling briars (Core Rulebook 400),
5th tree stride (×3); 4th charm (at will), suggestion (at will); 3rd entangle (at will),
sleep (at will); 2nd shape wood (at will), tree shape (at will); Cantrips (5th) tanglefoot;
Constant (4th) speak with plants
Change Shape [one-action] (polymorph, primal, transmutation)
Focus Beauty [one-action] (emotion, enchantment, incapacitation, mental, primal, visual) On a failed
save, if the target was already affected by the dryad queen’s beauty, the target suffers
the effects of a failed save against charm.
Inspiration [three-actions] (emotion, enchantment, mental, primal)
Tree Meld [two-actions] (primal, transmutation) As dryad, except the hamadryad can enter and
exit her extradimensional domain from any tree in her domain and she can bring up
to eight other creatures with her when she does so.
O-R
251

250
GIANT OCTOPUS LAIRS
Giant octopuses favor shipwrecks,
coral reefs, or underwater caverns
as lairs, where they can take
advantage of narrow confines
for protection. Giant octopuses,
like their smaller kin, are fond
of adorning and decorating their
lairs with found objects-many of
which, in the giant octopus’s case,
are also magical weapons, shields,
or works of art salvaged from
sunken ships or fallen adventurers.
Octopus, Giant
Giant octopuses are found in the heart of deep, dark oceans.
GIANT OCTOPUS CREATURE 8
N HUGE ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +15; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +17, Athletics +20, Stealth +17
Str +6, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –3, Wis +3, Cha –2
AC 27; Fort +16, Ref +17, Will +15
HP 135; Resistances cold 10
Speed 15 feet, swim 40 feet; compression
Melee [one-action] arm +20 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+9 bludgeoning plus Grab
Melee [one-action] beak +20, Damage 2d8+9 piercing plus giant octopus venom
Compression A giant octopus can move through a gap at least 2 feet wide without
Squeezing, and can Squeeze through a gap at least 1 foot wide.
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+9 bludgeoning
Giant Octopus Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 26 Fortitude; Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 2d6 poison damage and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 2 2d6 poison
damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison damage, clumsy 2,
and flat-footed (1 round)
Ink Cloud [one-action] The octopus emits a cloud of black ink in a 30-foot emanation. This cloud
has no effect outside of water. Creatures inside the cloud are undetected and can’t
use their sense of smell. The cloud dissipates after 1 minute. The octopus can’t use Ink
Cloud again for 2d6 rounds.
Jet [two-actions] (move) The octopus moves up to 200 feet in a straight line through the water
without triggering reactions.
Writhing Arms [two-actions] The giant octopus makes up to four Strikes with different arms, each
against a different target. Each attack counts separately for the octopus’s multiple attack
penalty, but the penalty doesn't increase the penalty until the octopus has made all
the attacks. If the octopus subsequently
uses the Grab action, it can Grab
any number of creatures it hit
with Writhing Arms.
O-R
251

250
FILTH FLINGERS
Ofalths prefer to remain in their
middens and sewers, for in such
environs they have a constantly
renewing source of not only food,
but refuse to fling at foes. An
ofalth encountered outside of
such wretched environs cannot
fling rubbish as a ranged attack
unless it rips filth from its own
body. Each time it does so, it
takes 2d6 damage.
Ofalth
Found in castle dung heaps, city dumps, and sewers, ofalths are thought to be cousins
of shamblers. But whereas shamblers are living heaps of soggy vegetation, ofalths are
living heaps of matter from an altogether more unpleasant source: these monsters
look like 9-foot-tall amalgamations of wet detritus, sewage, and rubbish with long
tentacular arms and stout legs. It can be difficult to tell where an ofalth’s body ends
and the foul contents of the cesspit they wallow within begins. They move through
refuse heaps in search of organic material in their endless quest to sate their hunger.
Though ofalths have a limited intellect, they still exhibit a vile curiosity. They
are no strangers to dissecting their prey after it has succumbed to their wasting
disease-a terrible and aptly named affliction that causes the victim’s blood to
seep from its pores. When an ofalth manages to secure a victim alive, it may even
torture its food by consuming it bit by bit while it shrieks for mercy.
Ofalths’ domains typically overlap with those of otyughs, who fear ofalths, though
otyughs have also been known to band together in order to take down an ofalth for
its rubbery flesh, which the otyughs consider an intoxicating delicacy. On the other
hand, ofalths seem to particularly enjoy taking otyughs apart one piece at a time.
They have been known to keep a captured otyugh alive for days or even weeks,
forcing the otyugh to endure the cloying scent of its own body decaying before the
ofalth feeds.
OFALTH CREATURE 10
CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +18; darkvision
Languages Common (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +23, Stealth +19 (+23 in trash and rubbish)
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +6, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha –2
Refuse Pile When it’s not in danger, an ofalth can spend 1 minute settling
into a 10-foot pile that looks like a heap of garbage. While doing so,
the ofalth gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC but can’t use attack,
manipulate, or move actions. A creature that enters the area of the
garbage heap or interacts with it must attempt a save against
the ofalth’s putrid stench and wretched weeps disease. An
ofalth can leave this form using a single action.
AC 31; Fort +22, Ref +17, Will +18
HP 170, filth wallow; Immunities disease, poison
Putrid Stench (aura) 30 feet. A creature entering the
aura must succeed at a DC 28 Fortitude save or
become sickened 1 until the end of its turn (plus slowed
1 for as long as it is sickened on a critical failure).
While within the aura, an affected creature takes
a –2 circumstance penalty to saves against disease and
to recover from the sickened condition. A creature that
succeeds at its save is temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Filth Wallow A ofalth gains fast healing 2 when in an area
with a high concentration of debris, junk, or excrement,
such as a refuse heap or sewer.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +23 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+13 bludgeoning
plus wretched weeps
Ranged [one-action] fling offal +19 (range increment 30 feet), Damage
2d10+7 bludgeoning plus wretched weeps
Wretched Weeps (disease); Saving Throw DC 26 Fortitude;
Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect (1 day); Stage 2 2d8
persistent bleed damage every hour and enfeebled 1
(1 day); Stage 3 2d8 persistent bleed damage every
hour and enfeebled 2 (1 day)
O-R
253

252
OGRE TREASURE
Ogre warrens are hideous abattoirs
strewn with severed limbs,
offal, and dubious stews. Ogres
sometimes keep shiny baubles,
like jewelry, and they appreciate
intimidating weapons and armor,
especially those that are large
enough for them to use.
Ogre
Ogres embody brutish, amoral violence and cruelty. Standing 10 feet tall and
densely muscled, ogres are as strong as they are cruel. Ogres are sadists that
enjoy remorseless murder, torture, degradation, and mutilation in all of its
forms. Although they prefer to vent their violent urges on smaller humanoids-
the smaller and more beautiful, the better-ogres promise a horrifying fate for
anyone unlucky enough to fall within their meaty grasp. But for all their creativity
in developing methods of violence, ogres often remain too dim-witted to realize
that their playthings lack an ogre’s robust fortitude and high pain tolerance, so
most captives die far sooner than the ogres might prefer. Such a fate is perhaps
preferable however, as those who survive too long as ogres’ playthings suffer
lasting mental scars from the horrifying abuse. A captive able to keep their wits
can sometimes trick the brutes by promising treasure, meatier captives, or other
crude amusements, taking advantage of an ogre’s limited intellect to engineer
opportunities to escape.
Ogres are social creatures only in the most debased sense. They gather together
in groups called families, though members are not always related by blood. Ogres
practice incest regularly, believing that it makes for stronger familial bonds, and
most ogres are misshapen or mutated from generations of inbreeding. The most
powerful ogre in any family is the “boss”-usually the family’s patriarch or
matriarch-while other ogres in the family learn to obey or risk being
brutalized by the boss’s loyal kin. Ogres lair in caves, crumbling ruins,
or dilapidated shacks close enough to humanoid settlements or animal
trails to make raiding easy. These lairs are filthy and frequently
contain all-too-recognizable evidence of their depravity.
Ogre Warrior
The simplest of ogres are slabs of muscle with hatefully beady
eyes, misshapen visages, and malformed bodies. Always eager
for mayhem and murder, ogre warriors are quick to turn on
their kin when there’s a shortage of smaller folk to torment,
so those who lead ogres do their best to keep them constantly
distracted with new opportunities for raids and ruin.
OGRE WARRIOR CREATURE 3
CE LARGE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Jotun
Skills Athletics +12, Intimidate +9
Str +5, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha –2
Items hide armor, javelins (6), ogre hook
AC 17; Fort +11, Ref +6, Will +5
HP 50
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] ogre hook +12 (deadly 1d10, reach
10 feet, trip), Damage 1d10+7 piercing
Ranged [one-action] javelin +6 (thrown 30 feet),
Damage 1d6+7 piercing
Ogre Glutton
Ogre gluttons take the act of feeding to
a horrific extreme, capable of extending their already cavernous
mouths wide enough to gulp down a halfling. Stories of ogre
gluttons being tricked into eating razor-edged shields or barrels
filled with poisoned meat are common, but such tales are of
little consolation to those who have been gobbled down whole
by these ravenous giants. In addition to their sadistic table 
O-R
253

252
OGRE HOOKS
Ogres are known for using
immense, curved picks called ogre
hooks. These uncommon weapons
cost 1 gp, deal 1d10 piercing
damage, have 2 Bulk, and require
two hands to use. Ogre hooks are
in the pick weapon group. Ogre
hooks have the deadly 1d10 and
trip weapon traits.
manners, ogre gluttons have a disturbing knack for coming up with violent
“games” that are little more than drawn-out torments, yet those who somehow
manage to beat a glutton at the rules of its own game can often enrage and frustrate
the ogre enough that the resulting tantrum is more than enough distraction to
afford a last-ditch escape from doom.
OGRE GLUTTON CREATURE 4
CE LARGE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Jotun
Skills Athletics +12, Intimidate +10, Survival +6
Str +6, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha –2
Items leather armor, greataxe
AC 18; Fort +14, Ref +7, Will +6
HP 70
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] greataxe +14 (reach 10 feet, sweep), Damage
1d12+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +14, Damage 1d8+8 piercing plus Grab and
glutton’s feast
Glutton’s Feast If the ogre glutton damages a living creature
with their jaws Strike, they gain 1d4 temporary Hit Points
for 1 minute.
Glutton’s Rush [two-actions] The ogre glutton Strides twice and makes a
jaws Strike. If they damage a living creature with this Strike, the
temporary Hit Points they receive from glutton’s feast is increased
to 2d4.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Small, 2d4+4 bludgeoning, Rupture 14
Ogre Boss
In ogre society, might makes more than right-it makes the rules. The
strongest or most violent ogre in a family (in most cases, this is the same
ogre) is invariably that family’s boss. Quick to hook fallen foes on their
weapons, even other ogres fear the repercussions of displeasing an ogre
boss. When an ogre boss barks out commands, the other members of the
family move quickly to obey.
OGRE BOSS CREATURE 7
CE LARGE GIANT HUMANOID
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Athletics +16, Intimidate +16, Stealth +11
Str +7, Dex +0, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items breastplate, javelin (6), +1 ogre hook
AC 25; Fort +17, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 130
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] ogre hook +19 (deadly 1d10, reach 10 feet, trip), Damage 1d10+11 piercing
Ranged [one-action] javelin +12 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+11 piercing
Bellowing Command [one-action] (auditory, fear, linguistic) The ogre boss issues a command
to hasten their fellows. Each ogre ally who hears and understands this
command becomes quickened until the end of that ally’s next turn,
but can use the extra action only to Step or Stride.
Sweeping Hook [reaction] Trigger The ogre boss successfully Trips a
creature using an ogre hook. Effect The ogre boss makes an ogre
hook Strike against the creature they tripped.
O-R
255

254
OOZING ACID
Many oozes have acidic attacks
that can quickly degrade flesh,
wood, and even stronger materials.
Some believe that oozes are the
result of alchemical or magical
experimentation run amok,
while others postulate that they
simply emerged from the natural
processes of evolution.
Oozes
Slimes, molds, and other oozes can be found in dank dungeons and shadowed forests.
While not necessarily evil, some grow to enormous sizes and have insatiable appetites.
Sewer Ooze
These amorphous masses of sewage and other detritus make their way through
filthy culverts beneath cities large and small.
SEWER OOZE CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM MINDLESS OOZE
Perception +3; motion sense 60 feet, no vision
Skills Stealth +1 (+4 in sewers)
Str +2, Dex –5, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
Motion Sense A sewer ooze can sense nearby motion through vibration and air movement.
AC 8; Fort +9, Ref +1, Will +3
HP 40; Immunities acid, critical hits, mental, precision, unconscious, visual
Speed 10 feet
Melee [one-action] pseudopod +9; Damage 1d6+1 bludgeoning plus 1d4 acid
Filth Wave [one-action] Frequency once per minute; Effect The sewer ooze unleashes a wave of filth,
covering all creatures within a 20-foot emanation. Each creature in the area must succeed
at a DC 17 Reflex save or take 1d4 acid damage and take a –10-foot penalty to its Speeds for
1 minute (on a critical failure, the creature also falls prone). A creature can spend an Interact
action to clean someone off, decreasing the Speed penalty by 5 feet with each action.
Gelatinous Cube
Found underground or in dungeons, these quivering cubes of slime continuously scour
their domain for food. The acid in their bodies is weak enough that many gelatinous
cubes still contain the gear of their victims, as they’re unable to break them down.
GELATINOUS CUBE CREATURE 3
N LARGE MINDLESS OOZE
Perception +5; motion sense 60 feet, no vision
Skills Athletics +11 (+13 to Shove)
Str +4, Dex –5, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
Motion Sense As sewer ooze.
Transparent A gelatinous cube is so clear that it’s difficult to spot. A
successful DC 23 Perception check is required to notice a stationary cube,
and a creature must be Searching to attempt this check. A creature that
walks into the cube is automatically Engulfed (this usually causes the GM
to call for initiative).
AC 10 Fort +12, Ref +0, Will +5
HP 90; Immunities acid, critical hits, mental, precision, unconscious, visual;
Resistances electricity 5
Speed 15 feet
Melee [one-action] cube face +11, Damage 1d6 acid plus paralysis
Engulf [two-actions] DC 19, 2d6 acid, Escape DC 19, Rupture 7. A creature Engulfed by
the gelatinous cube must also attempt a saving throw against paralysis.
Paralysis (incapacitation) A creature Engulfed by the cube or hit by
its attack is paralyzed unless it succeeds at a DC 20 Fortitude save. A
victim can attempt a new save to recover at the end of each of its turns.
Weak Acid A gelatinous cube’s acid damages only organic material-not
metal, stone, or other inorganic substances.
Ochre Jelly
Ochre jellies are animate masses of protoplasm with a sickly combination
of yellow, orange, and brown hues. Their acidic bodies dissolve flesh but
leave other materials, including a victim’s gear and bones, intact. Some 
O-R
255

254
OTHER OOZES
Many varieties of these nearly
mindless predators exist in the
world. Some are mere variants,
with different colored puddings,
jellies, and oozes with little to
differentiate them from those
presented here other than
their habitat. Others are more
specialized, or even dangerously
intelligent. The shoggoth
(page 297) is one such example,
but another variety of deadly and
powerful ooze is the thankfully
rare blight, a creature composed of
protoplasm and eyes that curses
entire regions with its presence.
ancient cultures would entomb bodies in stone sarcophaguses with ochre jellies to
allow the ooze to break down the flesh and clean and polish the bones.
OCHRE JELLY CREATURE 5
N LARGE MINDLESS OOZE
Perception +7; motion sense 60 feet, no vision
Skills Athletics +13
Str +4, Dex –5, Con +6, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
Motion Sense As sewer ooze.
AC 12; Fort +15, Ref +4, Will +7
HP 150; Immunities acid, critical hits, electricity, mental, piercing, precision, slashing,
unconscious, visual
Split Whenever an ochre jelly is hit by an attack or effect that would deal slashing,
piercing, or electricity damage and the ochre jelly has at least 10 HP, the jelly splits
into two identical jellies with half the original’s HP. One jelly is in the same space as
the original, and the other appears in an adjacent unoccupied space. If no adjacent
space is unoccupied, it automatically pushes creatures and objects out of the way to
fill a space (the GM decides if an object or creature is too big or sturdy to push).
Speed 15 feet, climb 10 feet
Melee [one-action] pseudopod +15, Damage 1d8+7 bludgeoning plus 2d4 acid and Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+3 bludgeoning plus 1d4 acid, DC 23
Ochre Acid An ochre jelly’s acid damages only flesh-not bone, stone, wood, or
other materials.
Black Pudding
Most often found below ground, these oozes scour caves for objects to dissolve
with their corrosive secretions. This caustic acid is particularly dangerous to
creatures that attack a pudding, as it can quickly damage and destroy gear.
BLACK PUDDING CREATURE 7
N HUGE MINDLESS OOZE
Perception +9; motion sense 60 feet, no vision
Skills Athletics +18
Str +7, Dex –5, Con +7, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –5
Motion Sense As sewer ooze.
AC 14; Fort +18, Ref +6, Will +11
HP 165; Immunities acid, critical hits, mental, piercing, precision, slashing, unconscious, visual
Corrosive Mass A creature that hits the pudding with a metal or wooden weapon must
succeed at a DC 22 Reflex save or the weapon takes 2d6 acid damage (after dealing
damage to the black pudding as normal). Thrown weapons and ammunition take
this damage automatically with no save.
Split When the black pudding is hit by an attack that would deal slashing or
piercing damage and has 10 or more HP, it splits into two identical puddings,
each with half the original’s HP. One pudding is in the same space as the
original, and the other appears in an adjacent unoccupied space. If no
adjacent space is unoccupied, it automatically pushes creatures and
objects out of the way to fill a space (the GM decides if an object or
creature is too big or sturdy to push).
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet; suction
Melee [one-action] pseudopod +18 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+7 bludgeoning
plus 2d6 acid, corrosive touch, and Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+7 bludgeoning plus 1d6 acid, DC 26
Corrosive Touch When the pudding hits a creature with its
pseudopod, any acid damage is dealt to the creature’s armor or
clothing as well as the creature.
Suction The pudding can climb on ceilings and other inverted surfaces,
though such surfaces are difficult terrain for it. 
O-R
257

256
MEGAFAUNA MOUNTS
Orcs are known for riding strange
and fearsome beasts, particularly
megafauna like dire wolves
(page 334) and smilodons (page
53). Given the opportunity, orcs
also enlist drakes, manticores, and
anything else big and frightening
enough to suit their needs.
Orc
Orcs are violent, monstrous humanoids that live by the rule that might makes
right. They amass in brutal warbands both large and small, decimating and
robbing those unlucky enough to cross their path. Countless small settlements,
outposts, and forts have fallen at the hands of orc raiders, whose fecundity and
sheer destructiveness leave an indelible mark on the lands they conquer. Survivors
of orc invasions are as likely to be fed to the orcs’ war beasts as they are to be
taken as slaves. Unspeakable atrocities await any outsiders brought back to orc
encampments, and to many, death is a far more preferable outcome compared to
capture by orcs.
Physically, orcs tower over most humanoids and look practically
custom-made for violence with their rough flesh, sturdy bone, and iron-hard
muscle. For all their tough looks, however, orcs are far from invincible.
They lack the discipline to conduct large-scale campaigns, for one thing,
and they typically lose their heads in the heat of battle. Even their skin scars
easily-though this is a source of pride to the orc people, since scars signify
strength and experience in battle. To orcs, the crisscross of old wounds are a
much a badge of pride and honor as any beheaded foe or claimed trophy.
Orcs are a people of violent passions in all that they do, not just war. Bonds
of blood are especially strong among orcs,
and lineage is important. The strongest
orc bands are typically made up of
brothers and sisters in more than
arms; orcs fight harder when they
are protecting their own kinsfolk, and
orc warriors will fight tirelessly to avenge fallen
family members. This emphasis on bloodlines is not
an altruistic one, however, and is in fact a double-edged
sword. Orcs whose families have been killed find themselves
at the bottom of the clan’s totem pole, and even a famous
chieftain can become powerless overnight if their brethren aren’t there to
back them up.
The chaotic and fractious nature of orc culture results in a great
variety of beliefs, superstitions, and legacies among different clans. This
cultural divergence causes substantial infighting among orc bands,
in many cases preventing the rise of larger orc nations. It can also
frustrate many attempts at diplomacy, as the taboos of one band
may be commonplace and thoroughly accepted practices among
others. Navigating a specific band’s culture can often mean the
difference between life and death to those who deal with
orcs off the field of war. Although orcs, as a rule, rarely
deal with outsiders, they recognize the benefits of trade
and willingly swap resources with other violent peoples
like hobgoblins, drow, and many humans.
Orc Brute
If orc armies are rarely well organized, this shortcoming can
likely be traced to the furious and undisciplined rank-and-file
brutes who make up the bulk of an orc warband.
ORC BRUTE CREATURE 0
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID ORC
Perception +5; darkvision
Languages Orc
Skills Athletics +5, Intimidation +2
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items shoddy breastplate, javelin (3), orc knuckle dagger (2)
O-R
257

256
GODS OF WAR
Orcs worship violent deities
that support their murderous
instincts, chiefly Rovagug, but
also Lamashtu and Gorum and
sometimes demon lords like Nurgal
and Shax.
AC 15; Fort +6, Ref +4, Will +2
HP 15
Ferocity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] orc knuckle dagger +7 (agile, disarm), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] fist +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +4 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Orc Warrior
The typical orc warrior is a violent combatant familiar to many
adventurers. Orc warriors fight for their clan, for riches, and-
perhaps most of all-for personal glory.
ORC WARRIOR CREATURE 1
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID ORC
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Orc
Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +4,
Survival +4
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items breastplate, javelin (4), orc necksplitter,
shortsword (2)
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 23
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Ferocity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] orc necksplitter +7 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d8+4
slashing
Melee [one-action] shortsword +7 (agile, versatile P), Damage 1d6+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] fist +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +5 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Orc Warchief
When orcs raid, the strongest is chosen as the leader, backed
up by brothers, sisters, and other immediate family.
ORC WARCHIEF CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID ORC
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Common, Orc
Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +6, Survival +5
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items greatclub, hide armor, javelin (6)
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +7
HP 32
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Ferocity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] greatclub +10 (backswing, shove), Damage 1d10+4
bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] fist +10 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +8 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Battle Cry [one-action] (auditory, concentrate, emotion, mental) Bellowing
mightily, the warchief gives themself and all orc allies within 60 feet
a +1 status bonus to attack and damage rolls until the start of the orc
warchief’s next turn.
O-R
259

258
OTYUGH “PETS”
Otyughs happily wallow in and
consume the garbage of other
creatures, making them an
efficient (and ecological) disposal
system for those bold enough
to try such a tack. The problem,
though, as such otyugh keepers
soon realize, is supplying enough
refuse to keep the nigh-insatiable
otyugh from wandering off from
its miasmic kennel.
Otyugh
Lords of sewers, ditches, and landfills, otyughs are filthy monstrosities that stomp
about on three massive legs in search of tasty garbage and refuse. Using two barbed
tentacles to grasp and tear, guided by a third with a proliferation of eyes at the end,
the otyugh has perfectly adapted to life in its cramped, disgusting environment,
where it uses its appendages to see into tight spaces and grasp hidden prey.
Most assume that otyughs originally evolved in swamps and moved into
sewers as civilization encroached on their natural habitats. True or not, they are
now one of the larger predators in those dank environs. Otyughs are territorial,
but they have been known to form loose collectives, even giving each other
important-sounding titles like “king of offal” and “duchess of slime” to indicate
their rank and station in their sludgy underworld beneath the streets.
Those who run across an otyugh might be surprised to hear it speak, shouting
at intruders to leave its putrid home or demanding tribute in the form of trash or
other prizes of dubious nature.
OTYUGH CREATURE 4
N LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +10; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +14, Stealth +8 (+11 in lair)
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 20; Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +10
HP 70; Immunities disease
Stench (aura, olfactory) 40 feet. A creature entering the aura must succeed at
a DC 20 Fortitude save or be sickened 1 (plus slowed 1 for the same duration
on a critical failure). On a success, the creature is temporarily immune to
the sickened and slowed effects of this stench for 1 hour. Regardless of
the save, while within the aura, creatures take a –2 circumstance penalty
to saves against diseases. An otyugh’s stench is due to the offal and refuse
that it wallows in, so cleaning the creature thoroughly (with create water
and sufficient scrubbing, for example) deactivates the aura, while a sufficiently
plugged nose allows an individual to avoid exposure to the stench.
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +14, Damage 2d6+6 piercing plus filth fever
Melee [one-action] tentacle +14 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d6+6 bludgeoning plus Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d6+6 bludgeoning, DC 22
Reposition [one-action] The otyugh attempts to move all creatures that it
has grabbed into other spaces within the reach of its tentacles,
rolling a single Athletics check and comparing the result against
each creature’s Fortitude DC.
On a failure, the creature
remains in place, and on
a critical failure, the
creature is no longer
grabbed.
Filth Fever (disease);
The sickened and
unconscious conditions
from filth fever don’t
improve on their own until the
disease is cured. Saving Throw DC
20 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no
ill effect (1d4 hours); Stage 2 sickened 1 (1 day);
Stage 3 sickened 1 and slowed 1 as long as it
remains sickened (1 day); Stage 4 unconscious
(1 day); Stage 5 dead
O-R
259

258
VARIANT OWLBEARS
Snowy owlbears trade their
terrifying screech for amazing
stealth and the learned ability to
erupt from the snow to take prey
by surprise. Although incredibly
rare, some owlbears have retained
a limited form of flight, allowing
them to glide almost 20 feet for
every foot of height descended.
Terrifyingly, these gliding
owlbears are entirely silent while
descending on their prey.
Owlbear
With the body of a powerful brown bear and the keen senses of an owl, the
owlbear is a dangerous territorial predator, fearlessly attacking any creature that
strays into its domain. Those who run afoul of an owlbear hear its terrifying
screech only seconds before the massive creature is upon them, ripping them apart
with deadly talons and a powerful beak.
Although their origin is lost to time, owlbears are assumed to be the result
of a magical experiment to make a more cunning predator. According to the
legend, the wizard was too successful and ended up being the first victim of
the beast. Today, owlbears can be found around the world, with a variety of
features. While the most common subspecies looks like a brown bear with the
features of a great horned owl, owlbears from the frozen north might resemble
polar bears mixed with snowy owls, and in temperate rain forests they might
resemble black bears with the heads of barn owls.
Most owlbears live solitary lives, gathering only to mate and raise cubs, which
are hatched from eggs. An owlbear’s territory usually extends to around 5 miles
from its lair, with clear signs of its habitat appearing with 1 mile (clawed up
trees, gigantic feathers, and shredded carcasses). The lair of an owlbear
rarely holds anything of value, but some adventurers have found
trinkets, coins, and even jewelry in the massive pellets of undigested
bones these monsters leave behind.
OWLBEAR CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +13; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +14, Intimidation +10
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha +0
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +7, Will +11
HP 70
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] talon +14 (agile), Damage 1d10+6 piercing plus
Grab
Melee [one-action] beak +14, Damage 1d12+6 piercing
Bloodcurdling Screech [one-action] (auditory, emotion, fear,
mental) The owlbear unleashes a loud screech
that terrifies its prey. Each creature in an
80-foot emanation must attempt a DC 20 Will
save. Regardless of the result, creatures are
temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is frightened 1.
Failure The creature is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The creature is fleeing for 1 round and
frightened 3.
Gnaw [one-action] Requirements The owlbear has a creature
grabbed with its talons. Effect The owlbear attempts to
disembowel the creature with a beak Strike. If the Strike
hits, the target must attempt a DC 22 Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is sickened 1.
Failure The target is sickened 1 and slowed 1 as long as
it remains sickened.
Screeching Advance [two-actions] (auditory, emotion, fear, mental)
The owlbear makes a Bloodcurdling Screech and Strides
twice. All creatures within 80 feet of the owlbear at
any point during this movement are subjected to the
effects of Bloodcurdling Screech.
O-R
261

260
CORRUPTED PEGASI
When a foul influence from the
fiendish planes, a necromantic
blight, or any other sinister
influence spreads through a
wilderness, pegasi can become
corrupted. These neutral evil
pegasi have the same statistics
as those presented here, but are
much more violent.
Pegasus
The pegasus is a winged horse prized for its capacity to serve as an aerial mount.
Unfortunately for those who desire a saddle-trained pegasus, pegasi are wild
creatures and do not readily accept even well-intentioned riders. Pegasi actively
resist being mounted or controlled by evil creatures, attempting to buck an
unwanted rider at every opportunity. A typical pegasus stands 6 feet high at the
shoulder, weighs 1,500 pounds, and has a wingspan of 20 feet.
Pegasi are highly intelligent beasts and have a strong sense of pride and
honor. The best way to entreat a pegasus is by speaking to it with grace and
offering gifts appropriate to a creature of such majesty. Prospective riders who
seek the mount for a worthy cause or virtuous quest have a much easier time
coaxing a pegasus into granting its favor. Regardless, a pegasus never accepts
a bit or saddle, for reasons both practical (a standard horse saddle
interferes with its wings) and purely egotistical.
In the wild, pegasi live in small herds and establish
territories on remote mountains where they
are relatively safe
from hunters and
slavers. They mature at the
same rate as horses and can even
breed with other equines, though the
outcome of such unions is typically a foal with
the traits of its least magical parent. On rare occasions,
the interbreeding of a pegasus and a unicorn may result in
a winged unicorn with characteristics of both parents and an
unrivaled sense of righteousness.
Some pegasi carry in them the blood of a mighty and heroic ancestor. These
champions of pegasus-kind dedicate their long lives to the pursuit of justice.
They possess powerful supernatural abilities to aid them in this fight, such as
resistance to fire and poison, immunity to petrification, and holy hoof attacks.
PEGASUS CREATURE 3
NG LARGE BEAST
Perception +12; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +10
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +7
HP 55
Buck [reaction] DC 19
Speed 40 feet, fly 80 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +10, Damage 1d8+5 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] wing +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Assisted Mount [one-action] Requirement The pegasus is Flying without a rider. Effect The
pegasus Flies. At any point during the movement, it can allow a willing adjacent
creature to Mount it. That creature must use a reaction to do so.
Gallop [two-actions] The pegasus uses 2 move actions, each of which can be either Stride or
Fly. It gains a +20-foot circumstance bonus to its Speeds during a Gallop.
O-R
261

260
SERVANTS OF SARENRAE
While phoenixes are not denizens
of the Outer Planes, they have
long been associated with the
goddess Sarenrae. Indeed, many
phoenixes view the Dawnflower as
their patron and subscribe to her
mission of redeeming those who
have fallen to evil.
Phoenix
The phoenix is a primordial bird made of heat and flame that dwells in the
most inhospitable regions of the desert. Though highly intelligent and brimming
with compassion, the phoenix is best-known for its iconic ability to resurrect
itself when slain, emerging reborn from the ashes of its own corpse. Phoenixes
are often sought out for their knowledge or healing abilities, as they cannot
abide the sight of suffering and deny their succor only to the most foul and
irredeemable of creatures.
Phoenixes enjoy the company of metallic dragons, and when the two dwell in
close proximity, they can forge lifelong friendships, sharing their resources and
words of wisdom while keeping each other updated on regional news.
While most phoenixes are benevolent, they are not infallible. When a
phoenix loses its way or falls under the influence of evil, it still retains its strong
appetite for knowledge. Evil phoenixes are known
to assault universities and libraries in their pursuit
for power-not only to gain new information, but
also to set fire to the texts and thus hoard that
knowledge for themselves.
PHOENIX CREATURE 15
RARE NG GARGANTUAN BEAST FIRE
Perception +27; darkvision, detect magic, see invisibility
Languages Auran, Celestial, Common, Ignan
Skills Acrobatics +30, Athletics +27, Diplomacy +31,
Intimidation +27, Nature +25
Str +6, Dex +7, Con +5, Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +6
AC 36; Fort +27, Ref +31, Will +28; +1 status to all saves
vs. magic
HP 300, regeneration 20 (deactivated by cold or evil),
self-resurrection; Immunities fire; Weaknesses cold 10,
evil 10
Self-Resurrection (healing, necromancy, primal) When a phoenix
dies, it collapses into a pile of smoldering ashes before returning
to life fully healed 1d4 rounds later, as if subject to a 7th-level
resurrect ritual. Self-resurrection happens only if there are some
remains to resurrect; for instance, a phoenix killed by a disintegrate spell
can’t use this ability. A phoenix whose remains rest within an area devoted to
an evil deity by consecrate can’t self-resurrect until its remains are no longer in that
area. A phoenix can self-resurrect only once per year.
Shroud of Flame (aura, evocation, fire, primal) 20 feet. 4d6 fire, DC 37 basic Reflex
save. While this aura is active, any adjacent creature that hits the phoenix with a
melee attack or otherwise touches it takes 2d6 fire damage. The phoenix can activate
or deactivate the aura with a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
Speed 25 feet, fly 70 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +30 (finesse, fire, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 1d12+9 piercing
plus 3d8 fire and 2d10 persistent fire
Melee [one-action] talon +30 (agile, finesse, fire, magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 1d6+6 piercing
plus 3d8 fire and 2d10 persistent fire
Ranged [one-action] flame jet +30 (fire, range increment 40 feet), Damage 6d6 fire plus 2d10
persistent fire
Primal Innate Spells DC 39; 8th continual flame (at will), dispel magic (×3), flame
strike, heal (×3), remove curse, wall of fire (×3); 7th dispel magic (at will); 6th
restoration (×3); Cantrips (8th) light; Constant (8th) detect magic; (6th) see
invisibility
Flaming Strafe [one-action] (evocation, fire, primal) The phoenix blazes with superheated flame
and Flies up to its Speed. It deals 6d6 fire damage to each creature within 20 feet of
each square it moves through (DC 37 basic Reflex save).
O-R
263

262
OTHER PLANAR SCIONS
As many types of planar scions
exist as planes of existence, and
even then there are significant
differences between scions
depending on the exact nature of
their extraplanar forebears. Angelic
scions are known as aasimars,
fiendish scions are called tieflings,
and monitor scions are urobians.
Planar Scion
Many immortals dwell upon the other planes of the Great Beyond. Some are
benevolent and kindly, like angels. Others are cruel and destructive, like demons.
And some fit roles outside of morality, like psychopomps. It’s far from unheard
of that mortals and immortals alike become entangled romantically, and the
children of such engagements carry a supernatural element in their bloodlines
for generations to follow. After the first generation, this otherworldly influence
usually lies dormant, but now and then, the influence can manifest strongly in
descendants many years later. These inheritors of extraplanar legacies are known
collectively as planar scions.
Tiefling
Tieflings are planar scions with fiendish blood. One of the most common types is
pitborn, who bear a demonic corruption infesting their mortal bloodline. Some
strive to live above their forebear’s fiendish reputation, but many, such as this
tiefling adept, simply accept their label and delve fully into evil.
TIEFLING ADEPT CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM HUMAN HUMANOID TIEFLING
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Common
Skills Abyss Lore +9, Acrobatics +7, Arcana +9, Deception +9,
Intimidation +7, Occultism +9, Religion +6, Society +9, Stealth +7
Str +0, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items dagger, explorer’s clothing, spellbook, staff
AC 17; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +8
HP 29
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] staff +6 (two-handed 1d8), Damage 1d6 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] dagger +7 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4
piercing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +7 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 21, attack +11; 2nd flaming sphere, invisibility; 1st
charm, magic missile, ray of enfeeblement; Cantrips (2nd) chill touch, detect
magic, mage hand, shield, tanglefoot
Divine Innate Spells DC 17; 2nd darkness
Drain Bonded Item [free-action] Frequency Once per day; Requirements
The adept hasn’t acted yet on this turn. Effect The adept
expends the power stored in its staff. This gives the adept the
ability to cast one prepared spell it had already previously
cast today (choosing a different spell level each time),
without spending a spell slot. The adept must still Cast
the Spell and meet the spell’s other requirements.
Duskwalker
Duskwalkers are infused with the same energies
as psychopomps. These ashen scions are reborn
on the Material Plane to serve as guardians of
the cycle of life and death.
DUSKWALKER GHOST HUNTER CREATURE 4
N MEDIUM DUSKWALKER HUMAN HUMANOID
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +8, Deception +6,
Intimidation +6, Nature +8, Stealth +12, Survival +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
O-R
263

262
PLANAR ORIGINS
Most planar scions are the distant
descendants of some immortal
progenitor far back in the family’s
bloodline. Others, however, may
be the result of powerful planar
energies, magical curses, or
even the intervention of a deity
or demigod.
Items composite longbow (20 arrows), hatchet (2), leather armor
AC 21 (22 against prey; see Hunt Prey); Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +10; +1 status to all saves
vs. death effects
HP 56; Immunities effects that would transform their body or soul to an undead;
Resistances negative energy 2
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] hatchet +12 (agile, sweep), Damage 1d6+5 slashing
Ranged [one-action] composite longbow +14 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range increment 100 feet,
reload 0, volley 30 feet), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] hatchet +14 (agile, sweep, thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+5 slashing
Ghost Hunter The duskwalker’s weapons have the benefits of the ghost touch property
rune on attacks against incorporeal undead.
Hunt Prey [one-action] The duskwalker designates as its prey a single creature that it can see
and hear or that it is Tracking. It gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception
checks when it Seeks its prey and a +2 circumstance bonus to Survival checks
when it Tracks its prey. It also ignores the penalty for making ranged attacks within
its second range increment against its prey.
Lastly, it gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Deception checks, Intimidation checks,
and Stealth checks against its prey and to any check to Recall Knowledge about
its prey, as well as a +1 circumstance bonus to AC against its prey’s attacks. The
duskwalker can have only one prey designated at a time.
Hunted Shot [one-action] Frequency Once per round; Effect The duskwalker makes two
longbow Strikes against its hunted prey. If both Strikes hit, combine their
damage for the purpose of resistances and weaknesses.
Aasimar
Mortals whose ancestry has been influenced by celestials are known as
aasimars, and angelkin, who have blood of angels coursing through their
veins, are among the most common type of them. Many angelkin seek
adventure as a means of doing good in the world.
AASIMAR REDEEMER CREATURE 5
NG MEDIUM AASIMAR HUMAN HUMANOID
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common
Skills Athletics +11, Diplomacy +12, Medicine +9, Religion +11, Society +7
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items crossbow (10 bolts), half plate, steel shield (Hardness 5, 20 HP, BT 10), longsword
AC 23 (25 with shield raised); Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +11: +1 status to all saves vs.
disease (against diseases, critical failures become failures)
HP 73
Divine Grace [reaction] Trigger The angelkin is targeted by a spell that allows a saving throw.
Effect The scion gains a +2 circumstance bonus to the saving throw.
Glimpse of Redemption [reaction] Trigger An enemy damages one of the angelkin’s allies. Both
the enemy and ally must be within 15 feet of the angelkin. Effect The angelkin causes
its foe to hesitate under the weight of its sins as visions of possible redemption play
out in its mind’s eye. The foe chooses one of two options:
• The ally is completely unharmed by the triggering damage.
• The ally gains resistance 7 to all damage against the triggering damage. After the
damaging effect resolves, the enemy becomes enfeebled 2 until the end of its
next turn.
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] longsword +15 (versatile P), Damage 1d8+7 slashing
Ranged [one-action] crossbow +12 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8+3 piercing
Divine Innate Spells DC 20; Cantrips (3rd) light
Champion Devotion Spells DC 20; 3rd (1 Focus Point) lay on hands (Core Rulebook 387)
O-R
265

264
POLTERGEIST TREASURE
A poltergeist needs items to
hurl as weapons, and over the
centuries of use, only durable
objects survive its rampages.
Silver dinnerware, hatchets, and
books might all be found in a
poltergeist’s collection.
Poltergeist
When a creature dies, and for whatever reason its spirit is unable or unwilling
to leave the site of its death, that spirit may manifest as a poltergeist: a restless
invisible spirit that is still able to manipulate physical objects. Many poltergeists
perished in a way that resulted from or has led to extreme emotional trauma.
POLTERGEIST CREATURE 5
LE MEDIUM INCORPOREAL SPIRIT UNDEAD
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +14, Intimidation +15, Stealth +14
Str –5, Dex +5, Con +0, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +4
Site Bound A poltergeist is tied to a location and can’t travel more than 120 feet from
the place where it was created or formed. Some poltergeists are instead bound to a
specific room, building, or similar area.
AC 22; Fort +9, Ref +14, Will +13
HP 55, rejuvenation; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision,
unconscious; Resistances all damage 5 (except force, ghost touch, or positive; double
resistance against non-magical)
Natural Invisibility A poltergeist is naturally invisible. It becomes
visible only when it uses Frighten.
Rejuvenation (necromancy, occult) When a poltergeist is
destroyed, it re-forms, fully healed, where it was destroyed
after 2d4 days. A poltergeist can be permanently destroyed
only if someone determines the reason for its existence and
sets right whatever prevents the spirit from resting.
Telekinetic Defense [reaction] Trigger A creature approaches within
10 feet of the poltergeist. Effect The poltergeist makes a
telekinetic object Strike against the triggering creature.
Speed fly 20 feet
Ranged [one-action] telekinetic object +13 (evocation, magical, occult,
range increment 60 feet), Damage 2d12 bludgeoning,
piercing, or slashing (depending on object)
Occult Innate Spells DC 23, attack +13; 3rd telekinetic
maneuver (at will); Cantrips (3rd) mage hand
Frighten [one-action] (concentrate, emotion, fear, incapacitation,
mental); Requirement The poltergeist must be invisible.
Effect The poltergeist becomes visible, appearing as a
skeletal, ghostlike humanoid. Each creature within 30 feet
must attempt a DC 21 Will save, becoming frightened 2 on a failure.
On a critical failure, it’s also fleeing for as long as it’s frightened. On
a success, the creature is temporarily immune for 1 minute. At the
start of its next turn, the poltergeist becomes invisible again.
Telekinetic Storm [two-actions] (concentrate, evocation, occult); The
poltergeist telekinetically throws numerous small objects,
such as dozens of pieces of silverware or books, either
spreading them out among multiple foes or directing
them at one target.
• When this effect is spread out among multiple foes,
the poltergeist makes a telekinetic object Strike at a
–2 penalty against each creature within 30 feet. These
count as one attack for the poltergeist’s multiple attack
penalty, and the penalty doesn’t increase until after all
the attacks.
• When this effect has only one target, the poltergeist makes a telekinetic object
Strike against the target, and the damage increases to 3d12. It deals 1d12 damage
on a failure, and no damage on a critical failure.
DISTURBED REST
One of the most common ways
for a poltergeist to form is when
its burial site is desecrated by
the construction of a dwelling.
This is usually an accident, but
some evil creatures seek out such
burial sites, intentionally creating
poltergeists to serve as guardians.
O-R
265

264
WHAT IS A KAMI?
The spirit creatures known
collectively as kami were originally
protectors of the natural world,
especially those things unable to
protect themselves. Over time,
though, their remit has grown,
and now kami protectors extend
their services to include artificial
structures and items. In theory,
any animal, plant, object, or
location could be served by its own
kami, but not everything has yet
been blessed with such protection.
The classification of which objects
warrant kami protection-and
those that don’t-is confusing and
complicated to all save the kami,
who find the organizational system
perfectly logical.
Poracha
Porachas are feline beasts native to the mystical Forest of Spirits in Tian Xia. In their
natural form, these graceful eight-legged creatures sport a gray tabby coat of fur
streaked with lines of olive green, but they are rarely seen this way. Even the youngest
porachas are capable of hiding within objects, making them incredibly elusive and
rarely seen except on their own terms. Because porachas can so effortlessly blend in
with the forest and emerge from its dark corners in an instant, superstitious locals
believe these beasts are related to kami-nature spirits who embody individual trees,
stones, or other elements of nature in the Forest of Spirits. The truth is that while
porachas frequently associate with kami, they are their own breed of mysterious
monster with powers over time and space that set them apart from nature spirits.
The poracha’s most iconic feature is its ability to bend reality to teleport, or jaunt,
short distances. But a poracha can also rest within objects, allowing it to safely sleep
inside. Given that a poracha experiences time very slowly while hiding within objects,
it can sleep inside of one for an extended period. Once it wakes, a poracha departs to
play in the living world. Porachas especially enjoy resting inside roadside milestones,
to maximize their chances of coming across travelers.
Porachas rarely tread humanoid-occupied lands, preferring the company of the
kami and their natural habitat in the Forest of Spirits. Though they enjoy occasional
conversation, they’re extremely sensitive to sound; they speak softly and request the
same from those they speak with. Their territories span vast swaths of the wood,
making them ideal allies for hunters or treasure seekers who would otherwise become
lost in the dense trees. But porachas are nothing if not fickle, and typically demand
inscrutable favors in return for their aid, such as the planting of a rare sapling in a
particular grotto or the clearing of an invasive monster species around a treasured
spring. Any attempt to coerce or trick a poracha into service is ill advised, for these
sacred beasts have many friends among the kami as well as others of their kind.
Though they generally don’t travel in groups, porachas know where to find more of
their kind in times of need, and an organized pack of porachas is a disorienting threat.
PORACHA CREATURE 4
UNCOMMON N MEDIUM BEAST
Perception +10; tremorsense (imprecise) 10 feet, darkvision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +9, Deception +11, Diplomacy +11, Stealth +13, Survival +10
Str +3, Dex +5, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 23; Fort +9, Ref +13, Will +10
HP 50; Weaknesses sonic 5
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +13 (finesse, magical), Damage 2d6+7 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +13 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 2d4+7 slashing
Jaunt [one-action] (conjuration, move, primal, teleportation) The
poracha teleports up to 40 feet. It must have line of
sight to the space it teleports to. It can’t use Jaunt
again for 1d4 rounds.
Object Meld [two-actions] (primal, transmutation)
The poracha touches an adjacent object
of enough volume to contain it. It merges
into the object indefinitely, and while it’s
inside, time moves exceptionally slowly for it and
it has only limited perception of the outside world.
The poracha can sense what’s going on outside the
object only using tremorsense. The poracha can use
only mental actions or Jaunt; if it Jaunts, it leaves
the object and appears where it chooses. If a
creature Strikes the object, the poracha is
expelled unharmed. 
O-R
267

266
PROTEAN DIVINITIES
The most powerful of all proteans
are a group of demigods known
collectively as protean lords.
Yet even their vast might pales
in comparison to that of the
mysterious Speakers of the
Depths. The Speakers are the most
enigmatic of the Maelstrom’s gods-
even their exact nature is unknown,
and scholars disagree as to whether
they are even divinities or just
aspects of the Maelstrom itself.
Protean
Guardians of disorder and natives of the primal plane of chaos known as the
Maelstrom, proteans consider it their calling to spread bedlam and hasten entropic
ends. The most powerful proteans are demigods known collectively as the protean
lords, although they are mysterious entities whose cults on the Material Plane
tend to be obscure and secretive.
Proteans divide themselves into a loose caste system and possess a dizzying
variety of powers. Most proteans have a serpentine body with the head of a
primeval beast. Scholars have long been intrigued by this fact-that scions of
dissolution and disorder would share so many features-pointing out that even in
the purest chaos there is some semblance of order. Others note that the serpentine
form is one of the most primeval shapes, perhaps suggesting that in a reality at the
dawn of time, such shapes were all that could exist. The proteans themselves have
little to say on the matter, which, perhaps ironically, only adds to the confusion
and lack of consensus surrounding their kind. After all, if even chaos cannot be
trusted to be chaotic, would that not be the purest form of entropy?
Warpwaves
Many proteans can subject their foes to disorienting alterations perceived in time and
space by creating ripples of unstable reality in the environment called warpwaves.
When a creature fails its saving throw and is affected by a warpwave, roll 1d8 and
consult the table below for the specific effect on that creature. Unless indicated
otherwise, a warpwave effect lasts for 1d4 rounds, and a new warpwave effect
negates any previous warpwave effect already affecting a creature.
D8 Warpwave Effect
1 Clumsy 2 (3 on a critical failure)
2 Confused and gains 4d6 temporary Hit Points
3 Dazzled (permanent on a critical failure)
4 Enfeebled 2 (3 on a critical failure)
5 Immobilized by filaments of energy
6 Quickened (Stride, Strike, or Step only)
7 Slowed 1
8 Stupefied 2 (3 on a critical failure)
Voidworm
Other proteans don’t consider the flying, iridescent beings known as voidworms
to be part of a protean caste at all, but instead merely a shameful side effect of
the Maelstrom’s constantly churning energy. To call a voidworm a protean in
the presence of a more powerful protean is as sure a way to instigate combat
as any.
Voidworms themselves have little interest in whether anyone sees them as
proteans. They maintain a thriving ecology in the Maelstrom, frolicking in
schools of up to 20 and playing in the chaos of constantly shifting realities.
Elsewhere (such as on the Material Plane), voidworms are mesmerized by the
principle of object permanence; many latch onto specific features of a region
(such as a hillside or pond) and flit through the air around it for months or even
years as they wait for the object of their curiosity to change. Minor changes-
such as a tree’s change of color in the fall, a corpse’s slow decay, or periodic
venting of steam from a geyser-all fascinate voidworms. A voidworm is about
2 feet long and weighs 2 pounds.
VOIDWORM CREATURE 1
CN TINY MONITOR PROTEAN
Perception +4; entropy sense (imprecise) 30 feet, darkvision
PROTEAN NAMES
Individual proteans have two
names: a traditional name in
their hissing, confusing language;
and an honorary title. The latter
is easily translated to other
languages, but a protean’s
traditional name can only rarely be
uttered in any tongue other than
Protean. As such, most proteans
tend to go by their titles when
dealing with outsiders, referring to
themselves as, for example, “Song
of Gentle Poison” or “Sibilant Cry
of the Storm.”
OTHER PROTEANS
Many other proteans beyond
those presented here dwell in the
Maelstrom, including the spectral
pelagastrs, the nearly humanoid
shapechanging ourdivars, and the
incredibly powerful izfiitars.
O-R
267

266
BORN FROM CHAOS
The Maelstrom, home of all
proteans, is the whirling mass
of turbulent primal energy,
planar waves, and soul-stuff
that surrounds the Outer Planes.
Planar scholars theorize that all of
reality was originally formed from
the Maelstrom in the early days
of the cosmos-a theory proteans
don’t necessarily dispute.
Languages Abyssal, Protean
Skills Acrobatics +7, Deception +6, Religion +4, Stealth +7
Str –1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –1, Wis –1, Cha +1
Entropy Sense (divination, divine, prediction) A voidworm can anticipate the most likely
presence of a creature through a supernatural insight into chaotic probabilities and
chance. This grants it the ability to sense creatures within the listed range. A creature
under the effects of nondetection or that is otherwise shielded from divinations and
predictions cannot be noticed via entropy sense.
AC 17; Fort +5, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 16, fast healing 1; Resistances precision 3, protean anatomy 5
Protean Anatomy (divine, transmutation) A voidworm’s vital organs shift and change
shape and position constantly. Immediately after the voidworm takes acid, electricity,
or sonic damage, it gains the listed amount of resistance to that damage type. This lasts
for 1 hour or until the next time the protean takes damage of one of the other types (in
which case its resistance changes to match that type), whichever comes first.
The voidworm is immune to polymorph effects unless it is a willing target. If blinded
or deafened, the voidworm automatically recovers at the end of its next turn as new
sensory organs grow to replace the compromised ones.
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +9 (chaotic, finesse, magical), Damage
1d8–1 piercing plus 1d4 chaotic
Melee [one-action] tail +9 (chaotic, finesse, magical), Damage 1d4–1
slashing plus 1d4 chaotic and confounding lash
Divine Innate Spells DC 16; 4th read omens; 2nd blur (self only),
obscuring mist; 1st detect alignment (at will; lawful only); Cantrips (4th)
dancing lights, ghost sound, prestidigitation; Constant (4th) freedom of movement
Change Shape [one-action] (concentration, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The voidworm takes
on the appearance of a Tiny animal. This doesn’t change its Speed or its attack and
damage bonuses with its Strikes, but might change the damage type its
Strikes deal.
Confounding Lash (divine, emotion, enchantment, mental) A
creature hit by the voidworm’s tail Strike is stupefied 1 for 1
round (stupefied 2 on a critical hit). A successful DC 16 Will
save negates this effect and grants temporary immunity
to confounding lash for 1 minute.
Naunet
Pugnacious and powerfully muscled, naunets serve
as scouts and rank-and-file troops of protean armies.
Resembling a thick salamander with a wide head, a powerful tail, and
tentacles tipped with snapping jaws in place of rear legs, naunets are the
most bestial of the proteans and occupy one of their lowest castes. Naunets
are 12 feet long and weigh 900 pounds.
All proteans are prone to unpredictable fits and unexpected action, but
compared to most others, naunets are much more bestial. Always ready
for a fight, naunets pride themselves in acting swiftly and striking
before unpleasant distractions like diplomacy can blunt a
combat’s beginning.
NAUNET CREATURE 7
CN LARGE MONITOR PROTEAN
Perception +14; entropy sense (imprecise) 30 feet, darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Protean
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +16, Intimidation +16, Stealth +14, Survival +12
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +5, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +3
Entropy Sense (divination, divine, prediction) As voidworm.
AC 24; Fort +18, Ref +14, Will +12; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
O-R
269

268
ANCIENT IMMORTALS
Among the numerous types
of immortals that dwell in the
Great Beyond, the proteans
are surely some of the oldest.
They’ve waged war against the
inevitable aeons from the advent
of their first creation, and speak
longingly of that time before the
gods themselves imposed order
upon reality.
HP 120, fast healing 2; Weaknesses lawful 5; Resistances precision 5, protean
anatomy 10
Protean Anatomy (divine, transmutation) As voidworm.
Speed 25 feet, fly 30 feet, swim 25 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +18 (chaotic, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+8 piercing plus 1d6 chaotic
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (chaotic, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+8 bludgeoning plus 1d6
chaotic and Grab
Melee [one-action] tentacle +18 (agile, chaotic, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+6 piercing
plus 1d6 chaotic and confounding slam
Divine Innate Spells DC 26, attack +16; 5th dimension door; 4th acid arrow, solid fog; 3rd
shatter(at will); 2nd obscuring mist (at will); 1st detect alignment (at will; lawful only);
Constant (4th) freedom of movement
Adaptive Strike [free-action] (divine, polymorph, transmutation) The naunet chooses adamantine,
cold iron, or silver; its melee Strikes count as that type for 1 minute or until it uses
Adaptive Strike again.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentration, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The naunet can
take the appearance of any Small, Medium, or Large animal, beast, or humanoid. This
doesn’t change its Speed or its attack and damage bonuses with its Strikes but might
change the damage type its Strikes deal.
Confounding Slam (divine, emotion, enchantment, mental) A creature hit by the naunet’s
tentacle Strike is stupefied 2 for 1d4 rounds (DC 24 Will negates). If the creature
was already stupefied in this way, the duration extends by 1 round instead. A chaotic
creature is only stupefied 1 instead.
Constrict [one-action] 1d8+8 bludgeoning, DC 26
Keketar
The ruling caste of the proteans, keketars orchestrate attacks against the bastions
of law and adjudicate protean disputes confidently and capriciously. A keketar
resembles a shimmering, serpentine creature with spines, claws, and
a dragon-like head. A keketar’s actual appearance is in constant
flux, but they generally stay about 18 feet long with a
weight of around 1,500 pounds. While their physical
forms can vary, two things remain constant: First,
a keketar’s eyes are always a piercing shade of
amber or violet. Second, the keketar’s mark of
office-a crown of shifting symbols that hovers
above its head-never changes. A keketar cannot
remove its crown but can suppress it, although most
are loath to do so and consider such an act one of
cowardice or shame.
Keketars fill a role in protean society of a
sort of priesthood, operating as intermediaries
between the other proteans and the Speakers of
the Depths. All other proteans defer to keketars,
treating them in a way similar to how citizens
of a mortal city would treat respected nobles;
even more powerful proteans defer to the will
of the keketars. As with many religions, dogma and
theology are prone to interpretation and change, and
among the proteans the situation is perhaps even
more pronounced. Whatever the nature of and
desires held by the mysterious Speakers of
the Depths, individual keketars may come
to dramatically different conclusions as to
their will and intent. To the proteans,
though, this inherent dissonance is
a strength rather than a weakness.
O-R
269

268
DEFENDING CHAOS
Where proteans go, chaos follows.
To proteans, there is no purer form
of existence than entropy, and
they constantly seek to oppose
the establishment of order in the
Great Beyond. However, proteans
don’t see life as being incompatible
with chaos; rather, they simply
believe beings-immortal or
not-deserve complete
freedom on their
own terms.
KEKETAR CREATURE 17
CN LARGE MONITOR PROTEAN
Perception +30; entropy sense (imprecise) 60 feet, darkvision
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Protean; telepathy 100 feet, tongues
Skills Acrobatics +26, Athletics +30, Deception +33, Diplomacy +35, Intimidation +35,
Religion +30, Stealth +28
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +7, Int +5, Wis +7, Cha +7
Entropy Sense (divination, divine, prediction) As voidworm.
AC 40; Fort +30, Ref +28, Will +34; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 290, fast healing 10; Weaknesses lawful 15; Resistances precision 10, protean
anatomy 25
Protean Anatomy (divine, transmutation) As voidworm.
Spatial Riptide (aura, divine, transmutation) 30 feet. A creature using a
teleportation ability within the aura or arriving in it via teleportation
must succeed at a DC 38 Fortitude save or wink out of existence
for 1d4 rounds before completing the teleport. The creature
can’t act, sense anything, or be targeted. On a successful save,
the creature completes the teleport normally but is stunned 1.
Keketars are immune to this effect.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 40 feet, fly 50 feet, swim 40 feet; freedom of movement
Melee [one-action] jaws +33 (chaotic, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage
3d10+15 piercing plus 1d6 chaotic and warpwave strike
Melee [one-action] claw +33 (agile, chaotic, magical, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d10+15 slashing plus 1d6 chaotic and warpwave strike
Melee [one-action] tail +33 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+15 bludgeoning plus Grab
Divine Innate Spells DC 42, attack +32; 9th divine wrath (chaotic only), prismatic sphere;
8th baleful polymorph, confusion; 7th disintegrate, dispel magic (at will), shatter
(at  will), warp mind (×3); 6th teleport (at will; self only); 5th creation
(at will), dimension door, hallucinatory terrain
(×2; see reshape reality); 4th confusion
(at will), dimension door (at will); 2nd
detect alignment (at will; lawful only);
Constant (5th) tongues; (4th) freedom
of movement
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine,
polymorph, transmutation) The
keketar can take the appearance
of any Huge or smaller creature.
This doesn’t change its Speed or its
attack and damage bonuses with
its Strikes, but might change the
damage type its Strikes deal.
Constrict [one-action] 1d10+15 bludgeoning, DC 42
Reshape Reality (concentrate, divine, polymorph,
transmutation) When the keketar casts
hallucinatory terrain, it infuses the illusion
with quasi-real substance. Creatures that do
not disbelieve the illusion treat structures and
terrain created through the spell as though
they were real, ascending illusory stairs,
becoming trapped by illusory quicksand, and
so on.
Warpwave Strike (divine, polymorph, transmutation)
A creature struck by a keketar’s jaws or claw Strike must
succeed at a DC 36 Fortitude save or be subject to a warpwave
(page 266).
O-R
271

270
PSYCHOPOMP DIVINITIES
The most powerful of the
psychopomps are unique demigods
known collectively as “ushers,”
each of whom has its own cult.
These psychopomp divinities
include Atropos, the Last Sister;
Barzahk, the Passage; Ceyanan,
the Shepherd; Dammar, the
Denied; Imot, the Symbol of Doom;
Mother Vulture, the Flesheater;
Mrtyu, Death’s Consort; Narakas,
the Cleansing Sentence; the
Pale Horse; Phlegyas, Consoler
of Atheists; Saloc, Minder
of Immortals; Teshallas, the
Primordial Poison; and
Vale, the Court of the Ancestors.
Psychopomp
Psychopomps are guardians and shepherds of the dead native to the Boneyard,
the vast plane of graves where mortal souls are judged and sent on to their eternal
rewards or damnations. Psychopomps ensure that the dead come to terms with
their transition from mortality and are properly sorted into the appropriate
afterlife. They also protect souls from being preyed upon by supernatural
predators. Nearly all psychopomps wear masks, especially when they’re likely to
be interacting with mortals, although the types of masks they wear are as varied
as the psychopomps themselves. The courts of the Boneyard preside in Requian, a
somber yet melodic language spoken slowly with various tonal shifts.
Nosoi
A nosoi resembles a whippoorwill, sparrow, or other small bird wearing a heavy
leather plague doctor’s mask. They are the clerks, messengers, and scribes of the
Boneyard, witnessing judgments, directing souls, and generally performing the
administrative grunt work that keeps the Boneyard functioning. Most nosois
are particularly chatty and eager to discuss how important they consider their
individual assignments to be.
NOSOI CREATURE 1
N TINY MONITOR PSYCHOPOMP
Perception +6; darkvision, lifesense 60 feet
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, Requian
Skills Acrobatics +6, Boneyard Lore +8, Library Lore +8, Performance +6, Religion +6,
Society +2, Stealth +6
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +3
Lifesense (divination, divine) A psychopomp senses the vital essence of living and
undead creatures within the listed range.
AC 16; Fort +4, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 18; Immunities death effects, disease; Resistances negative 3, poison 3
Speed 15 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +6 (finesse, magical), Damage 1d4–1 piercing plus spirit touch
Divine Innate Spells DC 16; 4th read omens, talking corpse; 2nd invisibility (at will; self
only), sound burst
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The nosoi takes the
appearance of a raven or songbird. This doesn’t change its Speed or its attack and
damage modifiers with its Strikes.
Haunting Melody [one-action] (auditory, concentrate, divine, enchantment, incapacitation, mental)
The nosoi croons an entrancing song. Each living or undead creature within a 60-foot
emanation must attempt a DC 18 Will save. The effect lasts for 1 round, but a nosoi
can use this ability again on subsequent rounds to extend the duration by 1 round for
all affected creatures. A creature that succeeds at any save is temporarily immune
for 24 hours. Despite being a mental effect, this ability affects mindless undead.
Psychopomps are immune to this ability.
Failure The creature is fascinated.
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature must spend each of its actions
on its turn to move closer to the nosoi as expediently as possible while
avoiding obvious dangers. If a fascinated creature is adjacent to the nosoi, it
stays still and doesn’t act. If the creature is attacked, the fascination ends.
Spirit Touch A nosoi’s Strikes affect incorporeal creatures as though etched
with a ghost touch property rune and deal 1d6 negative damage to
living creatures or 1d6 positive damage to undead.
Morrigna
Bounty hunters and investigators, morrignas seek out
creatures that thwart death or interfere with the natural
flow of souls. Morrignas dress in flowing spider silk and 
O-R
271

270
OTHER PSYCHOPOMPS
Nosois and morrignas are far
from the only of their kind. Many
others, like the skeletal vanths or
the draconic yamarajes, also aid in
the stewardship of the dead.
wear masks reminiscent of webs, as they consider patient and watchful spiders
to be their spiritual kin.
MORRIGNA CREATURE 15
N MEDIUM MONITOR PSYCHOPOMP
Perception +28; darkvision, lifesense 60 feet
Languages Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, Necril, Requian; speak with
animals, tongues
Skills Athletics +27, Boneyard Lore +28, Diplomacy +27, Intimidation
+29, Religion +29, Society +24, Stealth +27
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +4, Int +3, Wis +6, Cha +4
Lifesense (divination, divine) As nosoi.
Items +2 striking bo staff
AC 38; Fort +25, Ref +27, Will +29; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 240, regeneration 20 (deactivated by acid or fire); Immunities
death effects, disease; Resistances negative 15, poison 15
Wrappings Lash [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the morrigna’s
web wrappings uses an action to Strike or attempt a skill check.
Effect The morrigna makes a web wrappings Strike against the
triggering creature. If the strike is a critical hit, the triggering
action is disrupted.
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet (spider climb)
Melee [one-action] bo staff +31 (magical, parry, reach 10 feet, trip),
Damage 2d8+14 bludgeoning plus spirit touch
Melee [one-action] web wrappings +29 (magical, reach 10 feet),
Damage 3d12+14 bludgeoning plus Grab and
spirit touch
Divine Spontaneous Spells DC 35, attack +30;
6th (4 slots) field of life, heal, spirit blast; 5th
(4 slots) death ward, dispel magic, sending; 4th
(4 slots) freedom of movement, read omens,
spell immunity; 3rd (4 slots) blindness, crisis
of faith, dream message; 2nd (4 slots) calm
emotions, see invisibility, silence; 1st (4
slots) bane, bless, ray of enfeeblement;
Cantrips (8th) chill touch, detect magic,
disrupt undead, read aura, stabilize
Divine Innate Spells DC 37; 4th talking corpse;
Constant (5th) tongues, (2nd) speak with
animals, spider climb
Divine Rituals DC 37; call spirit
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine,
polymorph, transmutation) A morrigna can take the appearance of
any Small or Medium animal or humanoid. This doesn’t change their
Speed or their attack and damage modifiers with their Strikes, but it
might change the damage type their Strikes deal. Unless they choose
to manifest their web wrappings in their new form, they cannot make
web wrappings Strikes.
Spider Minions [three-actions] (conjuration, divine) The morrigna summons a giant
tarantula (page 307) or spider swarm (page 306). These spiders have
the summoned trait and remain for 10 minutes or until reduced to 0 Hit
Points, whichever comes first. The morrigna does not need to Sustain
the Spell to direct these summoned creatures, and the morrigna can
have any number of summoned spiders in existence at once. The
morrigna can see through the eyes of any of their
summoned spiders at any time.
Spirit Touch As nosoi, but 4d6.
Bestiary
272
ON PRIMEVAL WINGS
Although not true dinosaurs,
pterosaurs are often found in
the same regions as dinosaurs
and other megafauna, wheeling
in the skies above and adding to
the general primeval ambiance of
these lost worlds.
Pterosaur
Pterosaurs are primitive flying creatures. While many are smaller than a human,
the two presented below are quite a bit larger. Each of these creatures could
pose a serious threat to a person.
These flying reptiles can be found in a wide selection of regions, but they tend
to soar above warm or temperate climates.
Pteranodon
Pteranodons are quick and agile reptiles with 20-foot wingspans that enable them
to hover on wind currents for hours. These creatures have long beaks and equally
long crests that protrude from the backs of their heads.
PTERANODON CREATURE 2
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +8; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +7
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 35
Speed 10 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +10, Damage 1d10+3 piercing
Swoop [two-actions] The pteranodon Flies up to its Speed and makes one beak Strike
at any point during that movement.
Quetzalcoatlus
Quetzalcoatlus are the largest flying members of the
pterosaur family and are often mistaken for dragons due
to their immense size and 40-foot wingspans.
Quetzalcoatlus are carnivorous, feeding on a variety
of reptiles, mammals, large fish, amphibians, and other
invertebrates. They are not inherently aggressive
creatures and are happy to scavenge for food, but
when presented with live prey they readily attack
almost any creature smaller than themselves.
QUETZALCOATLUS CREATURE 7
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +15; low-light vision, scent
(imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +14, Athletics +17
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 25; Fort +16, Ref +17, Will +12
HP 110
Speed 15 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +17 (deadly 1d10, reach 10
feet), Damage 2d10+10 piercing plus 1d8
persistent bleed
Melee [one-action] talon +17, Damage 2d8+10
piercing plus Grab
Snatch A quetzalcoatlus can move at half
Speed while it has a single creature grabbed
or restrained. Both its talons are occupied
while it does this.
Swoop [two-actions] The quetzacoaltus
Flies up to its Speed and
makes one beak or talon
Strike at any point during that movement.
O-R
273
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
OTHER QUELAUNTS
Perhaps the most frightening tales
of quelaunts attribute them with
abilities beyond those detailed
here, suggesting that quelaunts
might be an entire category
of alien menace that has only
recently turned its awful attention
to humanity.
Quelaunt
This three-armed, three-legged monster has no discernible eyes, nose, ears, or mouth
or no visible means of ingesting food. Its limbs are distributed so evenly across its
body that it is all but impossible to tell which way the creature is oriented at any
given time. Few who witness the quelaunt linger on its alien looks for long though,
as the most pressing concern quickly becomes the invasion of their minds, as the
quelaunt sows doubt, sorrow, and rage. This monstrosity not only delights in the
negative emotions of its prey, but feeds on them, gaining strength and sustenance
from their dismay. For the quelaunt, no act is too terrible or cruel to inflict on its
victims, since the more a creature suffers, the more the quelaunt feasts.
Quelaunts are known to associate with other aberrant horrors, including brain
collectors and other creatures associated with the Dominion of the Black. However,
the more prevalent theory paints them as more alien-perhaps invasive beings from
another dimension of pure thought and feeling-and claims that in their natural
state they have no physical bodies at all. Few dare speculate further; the only known
autopsy of a quelaunt resulted in the researcher’s suicide just days afterward and all
the notes were mysteriously destroyed. Whatever secrets
there are to be unlocked in the anatomy of these bizarre
monsters are apparently important enough to warrant
great protection from quelaunts, even after death.
QUELAUNT CREATURE 15
CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +29; tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aklo (can't speak any language); telepathy
100 feet
Skills Deception +30, Intimidation +30, Occultism +27
Str +6, Dex +5, Con +4, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +8
AC 36; Fort +27, Ref +26, Will +31 (+33 vs. emotion)
HP 305; Resistances mental 15
Speed 40 feet; air walk
Melee [one-action] claw +30 (agile, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+12 slashing
Emotional Focus The quelaunt can cast the following cleric domain spells as 8th-level
occult innate spells at will without spending Focus Points: blind ambition (Core
Rulebook 389), captivating adoration (Core Rulebook 389), and delusional pride
(Core Rulebook 391).
Emotional Frenzy [three-actions] The quelaunt casts up to three spells chosen from its
at-will innate spells and its emotional focus spells.
Feed on Emotion [one-action] (attack, emotion, incapacitation, mental); Frequency once per
round; Effect The quelaunt feeds on the emotional unrest of a single creature
within 30 feet that’s under a harmful emotion effect. The target must succeed
at a DC 37 Will save or take 4d10 mental damage and be stunned for
1 round. If the target fails its saving throw, the quelaunt regains the same
number of Hit Points and Feed on Emotion does not cost the quelaunt an
action, allowing it to use another action this turn.
Occult Innate Spells DC 39; 7th crushing despair (×3); 3rd fear (at will);
2nd hideous laughter; Constant (4th) air walk
Rapid Strikes [two-actions] (attack) The quelaunt makes three melee Strikes, each
against a different target within reach. The multiple attack penalty
applies to each attack, but increases only after all the
attacks have been made.
Spiral of Despair [free-action] (emotion, mental); Trigger A
creature fails a saving throw to resist one of the quelaunt's innate spells or emotional
focus spells. Effect As the quelaunt invades the triggering creature's mind and plants
the seeds of negative emotions, it also strips away the target’s feelings of hope or
positivity. The quelaunt can immediately end a single emotion effect
from which the triggering creature is benefiting.
Bestiary
274
RAKSHASA IMMORTALS
Above all rakshasas rule the
rakshasa immortals, powerful
unique entities who deem
themselves deities. These beings
include Aksha of the Second
Breath, Bundha the Singing
Butcher, Dradjit the Godslayer,
Kunkarna the Dream Warrior,
Mursha the Beastmaster,
Otikaya the Spirit Archer,
Surpa the Avenger,
Zabha the Desecrator,
and untold others.
Rakshasa
Rakshasas are evil spirits that cloak themselves in the guises of humanoid
creatures, that they might walk unseen among their prey. They embody what
is taboo among most societies, and in the shape of those they seek to defile,
rakshasas gorge themselves on these hideous acts. A wide range of rakshasas
exist; presented below are the diminutive, sinister dandasuka rakshasa and the
infamous raja rakshasa, who are the most widespread and commonly encountered
of these fiends.
Dandasuka
Known as “biters” among the more powerful rakshasa castes, dandasukas serve
as spies and assassins for rakshasa clans or powerful spellcasters who have
found methods to bind one of these fiends to their will. Born to manipulate and
murder, these half-sized terrors revel in their work and delight in the sight of
blood. They often dress in extravagant clothes dyed with ostentatious colors
and wear numerous elaborate accessories, whether in their true form or in
disguise as human children, halfling merchants, or anything else that helps them
blend into their targeted society.
A dandasuka rakshasa is constantly haunted by a monstrous hunger that
gnaws at its hyperactive body, forcing it to feed often. In combat, a dandasuka
might pause to lick a bloody blade or lap at a pool of spilled blood on the floor.
These creatures settle for other meat when they must, but much prefer the taste
of mortal humanoid flesh. Regular offers of such victuals can keep a dandasuka
loyal to anyone willing to provide frequent meals, but care must be taken in
keeping a dandasuka, for many stories tell of them being overly eager to serve
an adored benefactor, taking off-hand remarks too literally, and
performing services of violence that were never intended.
DANDASUKA CREATURE 5
LE SMALL FIEND RAKSHASA
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Common, Infernal, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +13, Deception +14, Stealth +13,
Thievery +13
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +3
AC 23; Fort +12, Ref +13, Will +10; +2 status to all saves vs. magic,
+3 status to all saves vs. divine magic
HP 60; Weaknesses good 5; Resistances physical 5 (except
piercing)
Speed 25 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +15 (finesse, magical), Damage 2d6+4
piercing plus 1d6 persistent bleed
Melee [one-action] claw +15 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage
2d4+4 slashing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 22, attack +15; 1st
(4  slots) charm, ventriloquism; Cantrips (1st) daze,
detect magic, ghost sound, mage hand, sigil
Occult Innate Spells DC 19; 4th clairvoyance; 3rd
clairaudience, mind reading (at will)
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) The
dandasuka takes on the appearance of any Small humanoid. This doesn’t
change the dandasuka’s Speed or its attack and damage modifiers with
its Strikes, but it might change the damage type its Strikes deal
(typically to bludgeoning). It typically loses its fangs Strike unless
the humanoid form has fangs or a similar unarmed attack.
Sneak Attack The dandasuka deals an extra 1d6 precision
damage to flat-footed creatures.
O-R
275
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
RAJA HEADS
Raja's heads often resemble those
of cats or snakes, but they can
also be similar to apes, jackals,
vultures, elephants, mantises,
lizards, rhinos, boars, and more are
possible. In most cases, the type
of head a raja rakshasa possesses
symbolizes its personality-a
tiger-headed one is stealthy and
ravenous, while a boar-headed one
might be gluttonous and crude.
Raja Rakshasa
When not disguised as a humanoid, the raja rakshasa has the head of an animal.
The hands of a raja rakshasa are more subtly unsettling, for the fingers of these
fiends bend outward, away from the palms.
More than any other types of rakshasa, rajas scoff at religion. They understand
the power of the divine, yet they view themselves as the only things worthy
of worship from mortal creatures; not even their own immortals are deemed
deserving of such glorification. Raja rakshasas often form close-knit families that
work together to bring down mortal cities or to rule them from the shadows
within. Such families of rakshasas often incorporate other breeds of the fiend,
often using dandasukas as favored servants or stealthy spies. Even though a raja
family works together to achieve a shared goal, infighting and treachery among
their own is a constant threat.
RAJA RAKSHASA CREATURE 10
LE MEDIUM FIEND RAKSHASA
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Common, Infernal, Undercommon
Skills Deception +23, Diplomacy +21, Intimidation +21, Performance +19, Occultism +18,
Stealth +20
Str +4, Dex +6, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +5
Items +1 striking kukri
AC 30; Fort +19, Ref +21, Will +18; +2 status to all saves vs. magic, +3 status to
all saves vs. divine magic
HP 155; Weaknesses good 10, Resistances physical 10 (except piercing)
Scoff at the Divine [reaction] Trigger A creature within 30 feet casts a divine
spell or uses a divine ability. Requirements The raja rakshasa has an
unexpended spell slot that can be used to cast dispel magic. Effect
The raja rakshasa expends a spell slot that could be used to cast
dispel magic and attempts to counteract the triggering spell or
ability. The raja rakshasa can’t Scoff at the Divine for 1d4 rounds.
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] kukri +23 (agile, finesse, magical, trip), Damage 2d6+10
slashing
Melee [one-action] fangs +20 (agile, magical), Damage 2d12+10 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +22 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 2d8+10 slashing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 31; 5th (3 slots) dispel magic,
hallucination, shadow blast; 4th (4 slots) clairvoyance, dispel magic, fly,
suggestion; 3rd (4 slots) clairaudience, dispel magic, nondetection, vampiric touch;
2nd (4 slots) blur, hideous laughter, invisibility; 1st (4 slots) charm, illusory object,
item facade; Cantrips (5th) detect magic, ghost sound, mage hand, read aura, sigil
Occult Innate Spells DC 31; 3th mind reading (at will)
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, occult, polymorph, transmutation) The raja rakshasa
takes on the appearance of any Medium humanoid. This doesn’t change the
raja rakshasa’s Speed or its attack and damage modifiers with its Strikes but
might change the damage type its Strikes deal (typically to bludgeoning). It
typically loses its fangs Strike unless the humanoid form has fangs or a similar
unarmed attack.
Disturbing Vision [one-action] (concentrate, enchantment, mental, occult) The raja rakshasa’s
eyes flash green as it projects a telepathic wave in a 30-foot emanation. All
creatures in the area are assailed by a vision of evil decadence from one of
the rakshasa’s past lives. Each non-evil creature in the area must succeed at
a DC 29 Will save or become sickened 1 (and stunned 1 on a critical
failure). The visions last 1d4 rounds, and while they do, the
raja rakshasa and all evil creatures in the area gain a
+1 status bonus to all checks. The raja rakshasa can
use this ability again only once the previous visions end.
Bestiary
276
RATS AND DISEASE
Rats have a reputation of being
vicious, aggressive animals
that attack food stores in great
numbers and spread disease.
While rats are immune to the most
severe effects of their own filth
fever, the disease makes them
unpredictable and aggressive.
Some populations of rats carry
even more deadly diseases, such
as bubonic plague.
Rat
Rats are a ubiquitous menace, scurrying through the sewers and on the streets of
nearly every settlement the world over. Though a regular rat darting underfoot
might startle or even frighten the average passerby, giant rats and rat swarms are
far more dangerous.
Giant Rat
Giant rats are enormous versions of the common vermin. They are typically found
in abundant numbers, but since they cannot fit in the nooks where mundane rats
typically hide, they are much easier to locate and exterminate. They mostly live in
sewers where they can scavenge from the streets above, but some families of giant
rats live in more remote locations, such as dank caves or forests and hills. Rats
are incredibly adept survivors and can be found nearly anywhere in the world,
though they tend to favor temperate or warm climates as opposed to cold regions.
Although its bite alone is not lethal except to the very young or very old, the
giant rat carries the filth fever common to rodents around the world-a pestilence
more than capable of ravaging rural communities.
GIANT RAT CREATURE –1
N SMALL ANIMAL
Perception +5; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +2 (+4 to Climb or Swim), Stealth +5
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –3
AC 15; Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 8
Speed 30 feet, climb 10 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +7 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6+1 piercing plus filth fever
Filth Fever (disease) The sickened and unconscious conditions from filth fever don't
improve on their own until the disease is cured. Saving Throw DC 14 Fortitude;
Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect (1d4 hours), Stage 2 sickened 1 (1 day), Stage 3
sickened 1 and slowed 1 (1 day), Stage 4 unconscious (1 day), Stage 5 dead
Rat Swarm
A swarm of rats can cause total chaos within a household or business. Contracting
filth fever is all the easier when dozens of these agitated or hungry vermin
gather to bite victims en masse, making rat-hunting a viable career in many
parts of the world as desperate townspeople seek relief from the
disease’s spread.
RAT SWARM CREATURE 1
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +5; low-light vision,
scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +4 (+6
to Climb or Swim), Stealth +6
Str –2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +1,
Cha –3
AC 14; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 14; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses
area damage 3, splash damage 3; Resistances
physical 6 (except bludgeoning)
Speed 30 feet, climb 10 feet
Swarming Bites [one-action] Each enemy in the swarm’s
space takes 1d6 piercing damage and must
attempt a DC 17 basic Reflex save. A creature
that fails its save is exposed to filth fever.
Filth Fever (disease) As giant rat.
O-R
277
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
RATFOLK LOCATIONS
On Golarion, ysoki are most
numerous in the Darklands below
the continent of Tian Xia, where
they rule a vast empire, but they
can be found in the Inner Sea region
as well-particularly in the badlands
and hills of Numeria, where they
eagerly scavenge and collect
strange technological wonders
and weapons.
Ratfolk
True to their name, ratfolk are rodent-like humanoids well suited to living on the
outskirts of mainstream society. Despite common misconceptions that they are
dirty or diseased, ysoki, as they call themselves, keep impeccably clean. Ratfolk
are also sometimes mistaken for wererats and initially treated with fear until they
can correct the mistaken identification-if they get the chance to do so.
In general, ratfolk have a keen understanding of pathological and alchemical
sciences, which they employ in trade and self-defense. They make accomplished
alchemists and tinkerers, and they often protect their lairs with traps, bombs, and
other creations. Ratfolk merchants regularly dispatch large trade caravans that travel
widely for a year or more before returning to their home community. During this time
they make an effort to learn new things from the people they encounter and collect
new, interesting materials and goods that they can bring back to their warrens.
In their warrens, on the road, and in cities, ratfolk are extremely communal,
thriving on proximity to and contact with one another even in relatively tight spaces.
In addition, ratfolk are excellent at fighting in cramped spaces alongside their kin.
Threatening one ratfolk or their allies is a surefire way to rally the whole community.
Ratfolk Grenadier
Ratfolk grenadiers use alchemy and stealth to defend their communities.
RATFOLK GRENADIER CREATURE 4
LN SMALL HUMANOID RATFOLK
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +9, Crafting +12, Deception +7, Society +10, Stealth +12,
Thievery +9
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items alchemist’s tools, hand crossbow (20 bolts), studded leather armor
Infused Items A ratfolk grenadier carries 2 infused moderate acid flasks,
2 infused moderate alchemist’s fires, and 2 infused moderate frost
vials. These items last for 24 hours, or until the next time they make
their daily preparations.
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +13, Will +9
HP 60
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +12 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +12 (range increment 60 feet,
reload 1), Damage 1d6 piercing
Ranged [one-action] alchemical bomb +13 (range increment
20 feet, splash), Damage varies by bomb
Cheek Pouches A ratfolk grenadier has stretchy
cheek pouches that can store up to 1 cubic
foot of objects (though no more than 4 light
items). The ratfolk can remove or store an item
using the Interact action. As long as the ratfolk
has at least one object in its cheek pouches, its speech
is noticeably difficult to understand.
Quick Bomber [one-action] The ratfolk grenadier draws an
alchemical bomb with an Interact action and throws
it as a ranged Strike.
Quick Stow [free-action] Frequency once per round. Effect The
ratfolk grenadier stores one held item of light or
negligible Bulk in its cheek pouches.
Swarming A ratfolk grenadier can end its movement in the
same square as an ally that also has this ability. Only two such
creatures can share the same space.
Bestiary
278
REDCAP TREASURE
A redcap’s boots and cap are of
little value to other creatures, but
it carries a scythe and various
valuable trophies from its kills.
Redcap
Redcaps are sadistic and capricious fey who thrill in bloodletting and murder.
While they are most famous for appearing as wizened, bearded men, redcap
women are no less fearsome or cruel. Redcaps are ultimately craven bullies,
cowed by anything more powerful than themselves, a trait that leads them to fear
and despise the symbols of good deities. Many fairy tales explain how the redcaps
draw power from dipping the hats for which they are named in fresh blood. Just as
iconic to these cruel little fey are their iron-clad boots, and the clanging sound of
their metal soles clanking on stone floors is both discordant and disconcerting-
especially to those who recognize the sound for what it is. Redcaps typically stand
only 3 feet tall, with hunched frames, pointed ears, crooked teeth, and long, white,
tangled hair.
REDCAP CREATURE 5
CE SMALL FEY
Perception +12; low-light vision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +15, Deception +11, Intimidation +13, Nature +10,
Stealth +13
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items iron boots, red cap, scythe
Red Cap (necromancy, primal) A redcap’s woolen hat is dyed with the blood of its victims.
If the redcap loses its cap, it no longer benefits from fast healing and takes a –4 status
penalty to its damage rolls. It can create a new cap in 10 minutes, but that cap doesn’t
grant its powers until the redcap has turned it red with Blood Soak. A cap has
no benefit for creatures other than the redcap who made it.
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +15, Will +10
HP 60, fast healing 10; Weaknesses cold iron 5, divine revulsion
Divine Revulsion (emotion, fear, mental) If a redcap sees a creature
brandish a religious symbol of a good deity (which requires an
interact action by that creature) or use one to cast a divine
spell, the redcap must attempt a DC 19 Will save. It then
becomes temporarily immune to all brandished religious
symbols for 10 minutes.
Critical Success The redcap is unaffected.
Success The redcap is frightened 2.
Failure The redcap gains the fleeing condition for 1 round and
is frightened 4.
Speed 50 feet
Melee [one-action] scythe +15 (deadly 1d10, trip),
Damage 1d10+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] boot +13 (agile, versatile B),
Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Blood Soak [one-action] (manipulate) The redcap dips its
cap in the blood of a slain foe. The foe must have
died in the last minute, and the redcap must have
helped kill it. The redcap gains a +4 status bonus
to damage rolls for 1 minute.
Deadly Cleave [reaction] Trigger The redcap reduces a creature to 0 Hit
Points with a scythe Strike. Effect The redcap makes another
scythe Strike against a different creature, using the same multiple
attack penalty as the scythe Strike that triggered this reaction.
This counts toward its multiple attack penalty.
Stomp [one-action] The redcap Strides up to half its Speed and makes
a boot Strike at any point during that movement. If the boot
Strike hits a prone creature, it deals an extra 2d6 persistent
bleed damage.
REDCAP LOCATIONS
Unlike some fey, redcaps don’t
embody a particular natural
feature or environment, so they
can be found almost anywhere.
They tend to prefer areas that
allow them to hide or at least
get behind cover with their
quick movement, such as
forests, mountains,
and underground
tunnels and
caverns.
O-R
279
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
EATING REEFCLAWS
Reefclaws amass no treasure,
but their meat-if kept fresh-can
be sold in the right markets.
However, in an increasing number
of places, the practice of eating
reefclaws has fallen out of favor-
which means, of course, that
the reefclaw market has simply
shifted to black-market butchers,
where all manner of meat
gathered from dubious sources
is available for purchase, and the
value has increased accordingly.
Reefclaw
Reefclaws are aquatic monsters that resemble huge shrimp or lobsters. As
one might expect from its name, a reefclaw’s oversized claws are powerful
weapons with their vicelike grip and the ability to inject potent venom into
unfortunate prey.
While reefclaws can’t speak, they are intelligent enough to understand the local
language of humanoids near their hunting grounds. The creatures sometimes
listen to conversations, either to gain intelligence on the best place to ambush
aquatic or land-dwelling prey, or merely for entertainment value-reefclaws are
particularly fond of listening to people with high-pitched voices. Reefclaws are
usually solitary hunters, but small swarms of female reefclaws have been known
to gather around a single male for mating purposes or together for the communal
raising of their broods. In the latter case, the females will perform widespread
hunts in order to bring back a large enough bounty to feed their young. Such
hunting parties are extremely dangerous-they’ve been known to tip over small
fishing boats and attack those who fall overboard.
Once a reefclaw has decided upon a course of action, it follows through even
if doing so spells its own end. More than one reefclaw survivor has said that the
creature released its bone-crushing grasp only after its brains were leaking from
its broken skull, and even then the reefclaw was able to perform a terrible last
slash as part of its dying breath. During mating season, female reefclaws are often
a little more pragmatic and release their prey before endangering themselves and
their offspring.
Despite their intelligence and the accompanying moral quandaries, reefclaws
frequently find their way onto the dinner plates of
land-dwelling hunters such as humans and hobgoblins.
According to those who have a taste for reefclaw flesh,
the meat is either delectably sweet (for reefclaws
raised in colder waters) or slightly tangy (in the case
of warm-water reefclaws). Most civilized people
who know of reefclaws’ intellect find the act of
eating them distasteful, but this does not dissuade
unscrupulous nobles in coastal regions, for whom
reefclaw meat is a delicacy well worth the expense.
Likewise, fisherfolk whose focus is on the bottom
line of their ledgers are more than willing to hunt
the dangerous creatures-or, even better, hire out the
task to naive adventurers.
REEFCLAW CREATURE 1
CN SMALL ABERRATION AQUATIC
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Common (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +4 (+8 to Swim)
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –3, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 20; Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +4
HP 17
Death Frenzy [reaction] Trigger The reefclaw
is reduced to 0 Hit Points. Effect The
reefclaw makes a claw Strike before dying.
Speed 5 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +9 (finesse), Damage 1d6+1 slashing plus
reefclaw venom and Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d6 bludgeoning, DC 17
Reefclaw Venom (poison) Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude;
Maximum Duration 4 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and enfeebled 1
(1 round), Stage 2 1d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
Bestiary
280
ANCIENT REMORHAZES
A remorhaz has an unusual life
cycle. A remorhaz that survives
long enough (typically a century)
without succumbing to violence
melts a deep hole in the ice and
hibernates for several hundred
years, growing slowly as its internal
heat sources transform it into
something new-a creature known
as a frost worm.
Remorhaz
A remorhaz is an enormous arctic predator that resembles a multilegged insect
with draconic features. This monster has chitinous plates and more than a score
segmented legs, a multipartite maw, and winglike growths flanking its head. The
most unusual aspect of the creature, however, is its internal heat, which burns
with such intensity that it causes the armored plates on the creature’s back to
become superheated whenever the beast is agitated.
Remorhazes are carnivores. Their diet includes arctic animals such as elk, but
a hungry remorhaz readily devours anything it can catch and kill. It commonly
lurks beneath ice or snow and ambushes prey with a sudden upward strike. Many
victims die before even knowing what attacked them.
Those who survive the worm’s initial onslaught must face not only its deadly
jaws, but also its hideously hot body. This heat can melt weapons, scorch armor, and
burn flesh-all tactics the remorhaz uses to disable and defeat its foes. A remorhaz’s
internal fire allows it to burrow through ice and snow with ease. It leaves smooth
tunnels in its wake as melted ice refreezes to leave the telltale signs of its passage.
Most people underestimate a remorhaz’s intelligence, assuming it to be a mere
animal. However, remorhazes are capable of learning languages. Frost giants in
particular use this trait to form alliances with them. The giants provide food,
protection, and shelter for the worm, and in return the remorhaz acts as a guard
beast and helps the giants build fortresses and forge metal weapons. The giants also
employ the worms as war beasts, using them to undermine enemy positions.
REMORHAZ CREATURE 7
UNCOMMON N HUGE BEAST
Perception +14; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Jotun (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +18, Stealth +13
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +5, Int –3, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 25; Fort +18, Ref +15, Will +10
HP 120; Immunities cold, fire
Heat (aura, evocation, fire, primal) 5 feet. A creature that starts its turn in the aura
takes 1d6 fire damage. Whenever the remorhaz takes damage from an enemy, this
damage increases to 2d6 until the start of its next turn. Any creature that hits a
remorhaz with an unarmed Strike takes 2d6 fire damage, and a weapon that hits a
remorhaz takes 2d6 fire damage.
Speed 35 feet, burrow 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +18 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+9 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +18 (fire, reach 15 feet), Damage 1d10+3 bludgeoning plus 2d6
fire
Breath Weapon [two-actions] (evocation, fire, primal) The remorhaz
unleashes a gout of flame that deals 8d6 fire damage in
a 30-foot cone (DC 26 basic Reflex save). It can’t use
Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Ice Tunneler A remorhaz can leave a tunnel
when it burrows through ice or snow, and it
usually does.
Swallow Whole [one-action] Large, 2d8+5
bludgeoning plus 2d6 fire, Rupture 12
Thrash [two-actions] The remorhaz Strikes once
with its jaws and once with its tail,
each targeting a different creature.
Each attack counts toward the
remorhaz’s multiple attack penalty,
but the multiple attack penalty
doesn’t increase until after all the
attacks have been made.
O-R
281
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
ROC RESOURCES
While most treasure a roc may
possess is incidental-the remains
of prey haphazardly scattered in
or around the nest-roc feathers,
especially white or gold ones, are
highly prized in certain markets.
Even more valuable are roc eggs,
especially to some giants who
enjoy their unique flavor.
Roc
Legendarily massive raptors capable of carrying off elephants as prey, rocs are
typically about 30 feet long from beak to tail and have a wingspan of 80 feet
or more. While their beaks are hooked to rip flesh from bone, their hunting
strategy involves grabbing their prey in their powerful talons and then dropping
it from great heights before feeding. This method creates a massive amount
of carrion, which guarantees that rocs are followed by flocks of opportunistic
scavengers, such as ravens and buzzards, who find it easy to steal bits of the
larger birds’ meals. Rocs, for the most part, don’t mind these creatures, which
sometimes get gobbled up along with the rest of the roc’s food.
Rocs usually nest among mountaintops and cliffs inaccessible to all but the
bravest of terrestrial dwellers. They are long-range predators that hunt both
land and sea in search for massive prey to sustain them and their young.
Rocs are antisocial and lone hunters who compete with each other in fierce
aerial battles to protect territory. But about once a decade, a mating couple pairs
up to raise their chicks. Once the chicks are old enough to hunt on their own,
the parents separate to once again engage in lone hunting.
Particularly skilled druids or rangers might capture and train a roc to
serve as a flying mount or hunting companion, though examples of such an
incredible feat of domestication are few and far between. The easiest way to
rear a roc is to do so from the moment it hatches, since the chick imprints
on the first creature it sees. Acquiring a roc egg is by no means an easy feat,
though, and is often a death sentence for the would-be egg-snatcher.
ROC CREATURE 9
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +18; low-light vision
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +21
Str +8, Dex +2, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
AC 27; Fort +20, Ref +17, Will +16
HP 180
Wing Rebuff [reaction] Trigger A creature moves from beyond the reach of the
roc’s wing to within the reach of the roc’s wing. Effect The roc makes a wing
Strike against the triggering creature. If the roc Pushes the creature, it disrupts the
triggering move action.
Speed 20
feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] beak +21 (reach 15 feet),
Damage 2d10+12 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon +21 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage
2d8+12 slashing plus Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] wing +21 (agile, reach 30 feet), Damage 2d6+10
bludgeoning plus Improved Push 10 feet
Flying Strafe [two-actions] The roc Flies up to its Speed and makes two talon Strikes at any point
during that movement. Each Strike must target a different creature. Each attack takes
the normal multiple attack penalty.
Snack A roc gains a +2 circumstance bonus to hit with its beak Strike if the target is
grabbed or restrained in its talon.
Snatch A roc can Fly at half Speed while it has a creature grabbed or restrained in either
or both of its talons, carrying that creature along with it.
Bestiary
282
ROPER TREASURE
A roper keeps treasure from
its past victims, often enjoying
the items as mementos of prior
conversations or delicious flavors.
In addition, roper gizzards often
collect small trinkets and gems
from those who have been gobbled
whole. Experienced Darklands
adventurers have all sorts of
tall tales of the strange and
unexpected findings discovered in
a roper gizzard.
Roper
To all but the most sharp-eyed underground explorers, a roper appears to be
nothing more than a large stalactite, stalagmite, or pillar of ice. Cunning and
patient ambush predators, ropers use this to their advantage.
Ropers do not form large societies (although they can often be found living
alongside other deep-dwelling denizens), but they often congregate in small
clusters and sometimes hunt in groups. Particularly interested in the philosophy
of life and death and the finer points of the more cruel and sinister religions
of the world, a roper can talk or argue for hours with those it initially sought
merely to eat. Quick-thinking spelunkers can sometimes stave off a roper’s
appetite by entertaining it with stories or discussions of philosophy, but ropers
do not willingly allow such intriguing prey to escape alive. Stories speak of
particularly skilled debaters and philosophers who have been kept for days or
even years as pets or conversational companions by roper clusters, but in the
end, if such pets don’t eventually escape, the ropers’ appetites win out over their
intellectual curiosity-especially in cases where the pets constantly outmaneuver
their keepers’ wits and patience. A roper is 9 feet tall and weighs 2,200 pounds.
ROPER CREATURE 10
UNCOMMON CE LARGE ABERRATION
Perception +21; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +22, Nature +17 (+21 about caves),
Religion +19, Stealth +17 (+25 in stony or icy areas)
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +6, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +1
AC 29; Fort +20, Ref +15, Will +21; +2 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 215; Weaknesses fire 10; Resistances electricity 10
Reactive Lash [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the roper’s strand
leaves a square during a move action it’s using. Effect The roper makes a
strand Strike against the triggering creature.
Speed 10 feet, climb 10 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21, Damage 2d12+12 piercing
Melee [one-action] strand +23 (reach 50 feet), Effect sticky strand
Extend Strands [one-action] The roper extends or retracts six thin, sticky tendrils
from its body. While the strands are extended, the roper takes a
–4 circumstance penalty to Stealth checks, and while they’re
retracted, it can’t use its strand Strikes.
Flurry of Strands [one-action] The roper makes a strand Strike with
each of its strands (except those that are immobilizing
creatures). Each attack must be against a different
target. These attacks count toward the roper’s multiple
attack penalty, but its multiple attack penalty doesn’t
increase until after all the attacks.
Pull the Strands [two-actions] The roper pulls every creature
grabbed by its strands toward itself. The roper rolls
a single Athletics check and compares the result to each immobilized
creature’s Fortitude DC. The roper pulls each creature it succeeds against
up to 25 feet closer and each creature it critically succeeds against up to
50 feet closer.
Sticky Strand Any creature hit by a roper’s strand is enfeebled 1 and grabbed. Each
additional hit from a strand increases the enfeebled condition value by 1 (to a maximum
of enfeebled 4). This enfeebled value decreases by 1 every 8 hours. The roper can move
while it has a creature grabbed with a strand, but it automatically releases the creature
if it moves beyond the strand’s reach. The roper can release an grabbed creature as a
free action. A creature can sever a strand with a target attack that hits AC 27 and deals
at least 18 slashing damage. This doesn’t deal any damage to the roper itself, though it
can no longer attack with a severed strand.
O-R
283
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
FEARED AND LOATHED
Very few monsters are as hated
by seasoned adventurers as rust
monsters, for these creatures are
not content to merely kill those
who intrude upon their lairs-they
eat their hard-won weapons
and armor! Many innovative
dungeon-dwelling creatures
have seized upon this fact, and
those that can’t arrange for a
rust monster guardian to scare
adventurers away leave rusted bits
of armor with curious markings
strewn about, hoping that the
mere sight of potential rust
monster activity is enough to turn
back would-be troublemakers.
Rust Monster
Found in lost dungeons, deep caves, and abandoned mines, rust monsters are
a bane to any adventurers who rely on armor, weapons, or other metal items.
These strange-looking creatures grow to about 5 feet long, with four insectile legs
and a long tail ending in a four-pronged appendage resembling a tiny windmill.
However, it is the rust monster’s feathery antennae that strike fear in the hearts
of battle-hardened warriors, for a single touch from even just one antenna can
reduce an adventurer’s most valuable tools to a useless pile of rust.
Rust monsters aren’t inherently aggressive creatures, but they’re voracious
oxidivores, meaning they consume the rust created by their antennae. The
creatures savagely attack anything that gets between them and a possible meal,
and they relentlessly pursue any source of metal. A rust monster can be distracted
by a single metal-rich item, but they are often encountered in groups of three or
more, sharply raising the cost of escape.
Rust monsters are a terrible scourge in mining communities. If a group of rust
monsters discovers rich veins of ore, they can multiply quickly. By weakening
tunnels, attacking workers, and consuming the source of the miners’ livelihood,
these aberrations have created many mountainside ghost towns.
RUST MONSTER CREATURE 3
N MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +8; darkvision, metal scent 30 feet
Skills Athletics +7 (+13 to Disarm a metal item)
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Metal Scent A rust monster can smell metal as a precise sense.
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 40
Tail Trip [reaction] Trigger A creature carrying a metal item attempts to move out of a square
within reach of the rust monster's tail. Effect The rust monster makes a tail Strike
against the triggering creature.
Speed 35 feet, climb 10 feet
Melee [one-action] antenna +10 (finesse),
Effect rust
Melee [one-action] mandibles +8 (finesse),
Damage 1d10+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] tail +8 (finesse), Damage 1d4+2
bludgeoning plus Improved Knockdown
Antenna Disarm [one-action] The rust monster attempts to
Disarm a metal item a creature is holding using
its antenna (with the same modifier as an antenna
Strike). On a success, the item is subject to the
rust monster’s rust ability (see below) in addition
to the effects of the Disarm, and if the check to
Disarm is a critical success, the rust monster drops
the item on the ground in its own space.
Rust A rust monster’s antenna causes metal to rapidly
rust and corrode. If it succeeds at an antenna
Strike or Disarm attempt with its antenna, the
rust monster deals 2d6 damage (doubled
on a critical hit) to a metal item the target
is wearing or holding, ignoring its
Hardness. If the rust monster
hits an unattended metal
item, the item takes this damage
automatically. If a creature uses the Shield Block reaction
with a metal shield against an antenna attack, the shield is automatically broken, but
no other item is rusted on that attack.
Bestiary
284
SATYR MUSIC
A satyr’s gear is valuable,
particularly his fine panpipes.
Satyrs often stow caches of
alcohol, rich food, and pieces of
fine art (especially erotic art) in
hollows and glades they frequent.
Depending on the type of music
they prefer to play, satyrs may
be able to cast different 4th-level
enchantment spells, such as
paranoia or hideous laughter.
Satyr
To a satyr, life is a party and everyone is invited. Notorious for their hedonism,
these fey believe there’s no greater beauty than can be found in song, drink,
indulgent meals, and carnal pleasures. Satyrs use their enchanting songs and
natural charm to encourage all manner of people to follow their true desires and
free themselves from society’s rules. This usually involves enticing mortals to join
raucous parties or engage in trysts in moonlit glades. If a potential companion
rejects a satyr’s advances, however, the satyr has little interest in continuing a
conversation and goes off to find more amenable revelers.
The lifestyle of a satyr leaves no room for ongoing affairs or long-term friends.
Once his party is over or his lust is satiated, the satyr disappears back into the
forest. The offspring satyrs leave behind are satyrs themselves, and usually end up
being taken from their cradles by other fey rather than being left in mortals’ care.
Satyrs are always male.
The untouched beauty of the forest is sacred and precious to a satyr. Brutish
intruders who clear-cut trees or massacre animals without eating them risk
drawing a satyr’s ire. A satyr so provoked uses his spells to undermine foes and
attempts to dispatch them either with brutal ambushes or by leading a rush of
forest animals to attack.
Other fey, particularly good fey, look upon satyrs as loutish, embarrassing
cousins. They’re rarely hostile toward satyrs, but most find them insufferable and
advise any mortals they like to steer clear of satyrs’ glades.
SATYR CREATURE 4
CN MEDIUM FEY
Perception +10; low-light vision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Athletics +8, Deception +13, Diplomacy +13, Intimidation +11, Nature +9,
Performance +13, Stealth +11, Survival +8
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +5
Items dagger, panpipes, shortbow (20 arrows), wineskin
Sylvan Wine (enchantment, mental, primal) A satyr’s wineskin
magically enchants any alcohol inside. With an Interact action,
a living creature can imbibe the alcohol and gain a +1 item
bonus to Will saves and a +3 item bonus to Will saves against fear
effects for the following hour. When the wineskin is removed from a satyr’s
person, the magic remains only until the wine spoils. The wineskin holds up to
eight drafts of wine.
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +12
HP 80; Weaknesses cold iron 5
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] dagger +14 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+6 piercing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +14 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage
1d6 +3 piercing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +14 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+6 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 21; 4th charm, fear, sleep, suggestion; Cantrips (2nd)
dancing lights, ghost sound, inspire competence (Core Rulebook 386), inspire courage
(Core Rulebook 386), triple time (Core Rulebook 387)
Fleet Performer When the satyr Plays the Pipes to cast a spell, he can Step or Stride as
part of the activity.
Play the Pipes [three-actions] (auditory, primal); Requirements The satyr is holding a musical
instrument. Effect The satyr plays a melody on his instrument to cast charm, fear,
sleep, or suggestion without expending the spell slot and using his music in place of
providing the spell’s component actions. The spell gains the auditory trait and targets
all creatures in a 60-foot emanation instead of its usual targets. A creature that
succeeds at its Will save against any spell is then temporarily immune from spells
played from that satyr’s pipes for 1 minute. Satyrs are immune to this music.
S-T
285
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Scorpion
Chitinous scourges of deserts, forests, savannas, and badlands, scorpions are
deadly arachnids with powerful pincers and a painful sting. Scorpions can be
found in nearly every climate, where they hunt their prey with a mixture of
patient stealth and raw strength. Most scorpions live in underground burrows,
either as lone hunters or part of a larger colony. These arachnids are so feared and
dangerous that in many cultures, they are treated as deities or dualistic symbols
of both death and protection from said death.
Giant Scorpion
These massive, terrifying arachnids are typically 8 feet long from head to the
base of the tail. Giant scorpions are the favored pack animals and war beasts of
various desert-dwelling monsters, particularly gnolls. They are most commonly
encountered in the wild, however. There they lair in mountainside caves or
burrow beneath shallow layers of sand where they lie in wait for prey to wander
near. Sleek, pallid subterranean scorpions also exist, as do still larger species.
GIANT SCORPION CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +9; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Athletics +11, Stealth +7
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –4
AC 19; Fort +12, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 45
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Stinger only.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] pincer +11 (agile, reach 10 feet); Damage 1d8+6 slashing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] stinger +11 (reach 10 feet); Damage 1d6+6 piercing plus giant scorpion venom
Constrict [one-action] 1d6+4 bludgeoning, DC 20
Giant Scorpion Venom (poison); Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Maximum Duration
6 rounds; Stage 1 1d10 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 2 2d10 poison
damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 3 2d10 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
Scorpion Swarm
While a single scorpion is itself a menace, swarms of these vermin can be outright
devastating. These skittering droves of death swiftly bring down their prey before
devouring everything short of the victim’s bones.
SCORPION SWARM CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +11; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +6, Stealth +11
Str +0, Dex +5, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –4
AC 21; Fort +10, Ref +13, Will +8
HP 55; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses
area damage 5, splash damage 5; Resistances
bludgeoning 3, piercing 7, slashing 7
Speed 25 feet
Scorpion Venom (poison); Saving
Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6
poison damage (1 round); Stage 2 1d6
poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round)
Swarming Stings [one-action] Each enemy in the
swarm’s space takes 2d8 piercing damage
(DC 21 basic Reflex save) and is exposed to
scorpion venom.
SCORPION VENOM
While scorpions are often
symbols of death or evil, their
venom can be extracted and used
for a wide variety of medical
applications. A character can
milk an incapacitated giant
scorpion to extract raw scorpion
venom, which can be used as raw
materials to craft giant scorpion
venom or lesser antiplague. To
determine the value of ingredients
you gain each day and the DC of
the appropriate Medicine or Lore
check, use the level 3 task entry
in Table 4–2: Income Earned (Core
Rulebook 237).
Bestiary
286
SEA DEVIL “DIPLOMACY”
Sea devils dwell in most of the
world’s oceans, and they view all
others as enemies. When alliances
occur, they usually take place
with singularly powerful allies,
such as aquatic dragons, krakens,
or powerful humanoid villains.
Diplomacy, to a sea devil, typically
consists of violence and warfare.
Sea Devil
Sea devils are horrid, amphibious humanoids who lurk in Golarion’s oceans and
crawl ashore to steal away victims beneath the veil of darkness. When an entire
fishing village disappears overnight, sea devils are the first suspects.
Far from mindless monstrosities, sea devils are terribly intelligent, with a cunning
limited only by their strict adherence to hierarchy. They call themselves “sahuagin”
but have wholly embraced their enemies’ name for their kind as their own. Their
cultural militancy enables sea devils to act in concert to perform grand acts of
sabotage, marauding, and pillaging, and only the strongest (and most conniving)
members of the tribe make it to the top of the social ladder. For all their discipline,
however, sea devils are widely known to snap into murderous frenzies at the scent
of blood. Even the best-laid plans can fall apart when a sea devil breaks ranks to
revel in the spilled blood of their victims, an indulgence that can quickly cause
a chain reaction of bloodthirsty ecstasy throughout an entire raiding party. For
this reason, sea devils typically capture landborne quarry using nets and ropes,
dragging them to the depths of the sea before making even a single incision.
Among sea devil society, individuals are rewarded based on their performance
during hunts and shore excursions, with rebels and outliers quickly culled from
the ranks. Every pup is given a fair chance, however, and even the lowest-born
sea devil can strive for the rank of commander, general, or perhaps even king
or queen. Sea devils in positions of leadership tend to be among the largest,
most violent, and most calculating of their kind, and fully realized sea
devils are skilled warriors capable of capturing entire villages on their own.
The most powerful sea devils are mighty kings and queens who coordinate
the activity of lesser sea devils across territories spanning leagues, foiling
attempts at their positions via manufactured blood feuds and wars against
their numerous enemies ashore and underwater.
Sea Devil Scout
Scouts, among the lowliest (and most disposable) of sea devils, ply the inky waters of
the ocean in search of aquatic prey, tread ashore to gauge landborne threats, or charge
into battle with the advance forces of a greater sea devil war party.
SEA DEVIL SCOUT CREATURE 2
LE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS HUMANOID SEA DEVIL
Perception +9; darkvision, wavesense 30 feet
Languages Aquan; shark commune 150 feet
Skills Athletics +9 (+11 to Swim), Intimidation +5, Stealth
+8, Survival +7
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha –1
Items longspear, spear
Shark Commune (mental, telepathy)
The sea devil can communicate
telepathically with sharks within
range. It can communicate
only simple concepts like
“come,” “guard,” or “attack.”
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 30
Speed 25 feet, swim 35 feet
Melee [one-action] longspear +11 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile), Damage 1d6+3 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d8+3 piercing
Ranged[one-action] spear +12 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Blood Frenzy [free-action] (rage) Requirements The sea devil is not fatigued or already in a frenzy.
Trigger The sea devil deals bleed damage to a living creature. Effect The sea devil flies into
a frenzy that lasts 1 minute. While frenzied, the sea devil gains a +1 status bonus to attack 
S-T
287
Introduction
A-C
D
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
MUTANT DEVILS
Sea devils are prone to mutations,
the most common of which is the
manifestation of two additional
arms. These mutated sea devils
almost always rise to power as
barons. Other mutations occur as
well, but few are as strange as
those that result in sea devils who
look almost like aquatic elves-
save for a row of sharp teeth in
their mouths.
rolls with its claws and jaws, gains a +4 status bonus to damage rolls with its claws and
jaws, gains 7 temporary HP until the end of the frenzy, and takes a –2 status penalty to
AC. The sea devil can’t voluntarily stop its frenzy. After its frenzy, the sea devil is fatigued.
Bloodletting When the sea devil deals piercing or slashing damage, it also deals 1d4
persistent bleed damage if the target was flat-footed or if the attack was a critical hit.
Sea Devil Brute
Physically imposing sea devils are equipped with some of the best weaponry the
community can find, though most are happy to rend their foes using tooth and nail.
SEA DEVIL BRUTE CREATURE 4
LE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS HUMANOID SEA DEVIL
Perception +7; darkvision, wavesense 30 feet
Languages Aquan; shark commune 150 feet
Skills Athletics +12 (+15 to Swim), Intimidation +9, Survival +9
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items trident
Shark Commune (mental, telepathy) As sea devil scout.
AC 21; Fort +13, Ref +11, Will +9
HP 60
Speed 25 feet, swim 35 feet
Melee [one-action] trident +14, Damage 1d8+8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +14 (agile), Damage 1d6+6 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +14, Damage 1d8+6 piercing
Ranged [one-action] trident +11 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d8+8 piercing
Blood Frenzy [free-action] (rage) As sea devil scout, 11 temporary HP.
Bloodletting As sea devil scout.
Unimpeded Throw A sea devil brute can use thrown ranged weapons
underwater with no penalty due to range increment.
Sea Devil Baron
Unlike in many cultures, the highest-ranking sea devils are expected not
just to wade into battle alongside their brethren, but to actively lead
the campaign.
SEA DEVIL BARON CREATURE 6
LE MEDIUM AMPHIBIOUS HUMANOID MUTANT SEA DEVIL
Perception +13; darkvision, wavesense 30 feet
Languages Aquan; shark commune 150 feet
Skills Athletics +15 (+18 to Swim), Intimidation +12, Stealth +12,
Survival +11
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +2
Items longspear, spear (2)
Shark Commune (mental, telepathy) As sea devil scout.
AC 24; Fort +16, Ref +14, Will +13
HP 95
Speed 25 feet, swim 35 feet
Melee [one-action] longspear +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+11 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage 1d6+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +17, Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Ranged [one-action] spear +17 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d8+11 piercing
Blood Frenzy [free-action] (rage) As sea devil scout, 15 temporary HP.
Bloodletting As sea devil scout.
Hateful Tide [two-actions] (rage); Requirement The sea devil baron is in a
blood frenzy. Effect The sea devil baron unleashes a whirlwind
of attacks against its foes, making a single melee Strike with its
claws or jaws against each opponent within reach.
S-T
289

288
SEA SERPENT LAIRS
While an underwater cave will do,
sea serpents prefer to “build” lairs
by sinking ships. A sea serpent
might even create a massive
underwater graveyard by crashing
several ships in the same location
and letting the debris stack up on
the ocean floor.
Sea Serpent
These fabled beasts resemble massive snakes with long rows of finned spines down
their back. Temperamental and territorial, sea serpents can capsize a boat with ease,
and most won’t hesitate to do so when hungry or threatened. Stories abound of
aggrieved captains who spend their entire lives hunting down the elusive monster
that sunk their ships and took their livelihoods. These hunts rely on rumors and
glimpses of the beasts, as few survive the catastrophes wrought by sea serpents.
While many fishermen’s tales paint sea serpents as divinely appointed
guardians of the ocean or, alternately, as evil and demonic agents, the truth is
that most sea serpents are simply very large beasts with a knack for avoiding
magical detection.
SEA SERPENT CREATURE 12
UNCOMMON N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +22; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +18, Athletics +26 (+28 to Swim), Stealth +28
Str +8, Dex +4, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Undetectable (abjuration, primal) A sea serpent automatically tries to counteract any
detection, revelation, or scrying divination attempted against it, using its Stealth
modifier for its counteract modifier.
AC 35; Fort +25, Ref +21, Will +21
HP 210
Speed 20 feet, swim 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +27 (reach 20 feet), Damage 3d10+14 piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +27 (agile, reach 30 feet), Damage 2d10+14 bludgeoning plus Grab
Ranged [one-action] water spout +25 (brutal, range increment 100 feet, water), Damage 2d6+12
bludgeoning plus sea serpent algae
Capsize [one-action] (attack) The sea serpent
attempts to capsize an aquatic
vessel of its size or smaller that
it’s adjacent to. It must succeed
at an Athletics check with a DC
of 35 or the pilot’s Sailing Lore DC,
whichever is higher.
Constrict [one-action] 1d10+14 bludgeoning
Sea Serpent Algae (incapacitation, poison
The water in the ballast organs around
the sea serpent’s neck is full of
psychotropic algae. Saving Throw
DC 34 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1
confused and, if flying,
spends its first action each
turn to descend 20 feet
(1 round); Stage 2 confused
and, if flying, descends until
reaching the ground or water
below (1 round).
Spine Rake [two-actions](attack, move) The sea
serpent extends the spines along its back
and Swims or Strides. Each creature
the serpent is adjacent to at any
point during its movement
takes 4d6+8 slashing damage
(DC 32 basic Reflex save).
Swallow Whole [one-action](attack) Huge,
2d10+6 bludgeoning, Rupture 20
S-T
289

288
SHADOW LOCATIONS
Shadows might lurk in any dimly
lit area-a corner in a crumbling
ruin, a room lit by flickering
candles, or a shaded forest at
dusk. They travel to and from the
Shadow Plane, though it is unclear
if they do so via their own magic
or by aligning themselves with a
more powerful being capable of
such planar shifting.
Shadow
The mysterious undead known as shadows lurk in dark places and feed on those
who stray too far from the light. Those who parley with shadows, typically by
keeping them at bay with a glowing weapon, may learn great secrets, for they
are ideal spies.
SHADOW CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM INCORPOREAL UNDEAD
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Necril
Skills Acrobatics +10, Stealth +14
Str –5, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha +3
AC 20; Fort +8, Ref +14, Will +12
HP 40; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision,
unconscious; Weaknesses light vulnerability; Resistances all 5 (except
force, ghost touch, or positive; double resistance against non-magical)
Light Vulnerability An object shedding magical light (such as from the light
spell) is treated as magical when used to attack the shadow.
Speed fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] shadow hand +15 (finesse, magical), Damage 2d6+3 negative
Shadow Spawn When a creature’s shadow is pulled free by Steal Shadow, it becomes
a shadow spawn under the command of the shadow that created it. This shadow
spawn doesn’t have Steal Shadow and is perpetually and incurably clumsy 2. If the
creature the shadow spawn was pulled from dies, the shadow spawn becomes a
full-fledged, autonomous shadow. If the creature recovers from its enfeeblement, its
shadow returns to it and the shadow spawn is extinguished.
Slink in Shadows The shadow can Hide or end its Sneak in a creature’s or object’s shadow.
Steal Shadow (divine, necromancy) [one-action] Requirement The shadow hit a living creature
with a shadow hand Strike on its previous action. Effect The shadow pulls at the
target’s shadow, making the creature enfeebled 1. This is cumulative with other
enfeebled conditions from shadows, to a maximum of enfeebled 4. If this
increases a creature’s enfeebled value to 3 or more, the target’s shadow is
separated from its body (see shadow spawn). Enfeebled from Steal Shadow
decreases by 1 every hour.
Greater Shadow
Shadows that spend long amounts of time on the Shadow Plane
and absorb its magic become greater shadows.
 GREATER SHADOW CREATURE 7
CE MEDIUM INCORPOREAL UNDEAD
Perception +14; darkvision
Languages Necril
Skills Acrobatics +16, Stealth +20
Str –5, Dex +5, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +4
AC 24; Fort +11, Ref +18, Will +15
HP 75; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, precision,
unconscious; Weaknesses light vulnerability; Resistances all 10 (except
force, ghost touch, or positive; double resistance against non-magical)
Light Vulnerability As shadow.
Speed fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] shadow hand +18 (finesse, magical), Damage 2d10+6 negative
Divine Innate Spells DC 25; 2nd darkness (at will)
Shadow Spawn As shadow, but the spawn isn’t clumsy.
Slink in Shadows As shadow.
Steal Shadow [one-action] (divine, necromancy) As shadow, but causes enfeebled 2 (or enfeebled 3
on a critical hit).
S-T
291

290
SHAMBLER TREASURE
Shamblers collect trinkets from
their previous victims and store
them in small hollows within their
bodies. They particularly prize
gems, but also like alchemical
or magical items that produce
electrical effects such as bottled
lightning and shock runes.
Shambler
Shamblers are cunning carnivorous plants that resemble heaps of wet, rotting
vegetation. Even when standing erect on their stumpy legs, shamblers don’t have
much in the way of identifiable anatomy; they are tangles of parasitic vines that
lash out at prey with their longest creepers, entwined together to deliver powerful
blows. Sometimes called “shambling mounds,” these ambush predators have a
particular fondness for flesh, and are most well known for their ability to hunker
down and hide in plain sight. A shambler can draw nutrients from plant matter
or soil, but won’t do so if it suspects meat might soon wander near, and indeed
may lie in wait for days in anticipation of such a meal.
Shamblers are usually solitary creatures. Fierce thunderstorms are among the
few events that bring numerous shamblers together. During such gatherings, the
plants gather around strange but seemingly sacred earthen mounds in remote
jungles and swamps and cavort and caper excitedly, stretching their tendrils
toward the sky to hope for-or perhaps to summon-intense lightning strikes.
Not only are these strange plants unharmed by even the most powerful electrical
strikes, but they seem to become supernaturally empowered by such bursts of
raw energy. Shamblers consider being struck by lightning a sign of divine favor,
and those shamblers frequently blasted by bolts of electricity become respected
(and powerful) elders among their kind. Shambler elders are few and far between
and may possess a wide array of abilities; some can cast
primal spells, others can empathically call upon the aid
of other shamblers in the area, and still others wield
awesome powers over electricity.
Other types of shamblers exist, including those composed
not of plant matter but fungal growth. These creatures, known
as “spore mounds,” discharge clouds of toxic spores from their
bodies when struck in combat. In semiarid deserts, shambler-like
plants called tanglethorns dwell amid sagebrush and rock
formations; they resemble bunches of tumbleweeds and cacti and
inflict deep, bloody lacerations with their attacks.
SHAMBLER CREATURE 6
N LARGE PLANT
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Common, Elven, Sylvan (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +16, Stealth +12 (+18 in forests or swamps)
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –2, Wis +2, Cha –1
Mound When it’s not in danger, the shambler spends 1 minute settling
into a pile that looks like a lump of loose vegetation. While it is in
this form, creatures must actively Seek and succeed at a DC 22
Perception check (DC 28 in forests or swamps) to detect the
shambler’s true nature.
AC 22; Fort +17, Ref +11, Will +14
HP 120; Immunities electricity; Resistances fire 5
Electric Surge Whenever the shambler would take electricity damage
or is targeted with an electricity effect, it gains 12 temporary HP and
is quickened until the end of its next turn. It can use its extra
action to Stride, Strike, or Swim.
Shamble [reaction] Requirements The shambler is in mound
form. Trigger A creature unaware of the shambler’s true
nature comes within 10 feet. Effect The shambler makes a vine
Strike against the creature. Then roll initiative.
Speed 20 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] vine +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+8 bludgeoning plus Grab
Vine Lash [two-actions] The shambler makes a vine Strike against each creature within reach.
Its multiple attack penalty increases only after all the attacks.
S-T
291

290
BECOMING MANEATERS
Contrary to popular belief, sharks
are not particularly fond of
humanoids as meals. Only under
the right conditions-such as
when food is scarce or the shark
mistakes its victim for a seal-will
a shark attack a swimmer or small
boat. Such occasions are traumatic
enough for survivors to perpetuate
the myth of shark as maneater.
Shark
Sharks of all shapes and sizes have stalked the oceans, largely unchanged,
since primordial times. They are efficient, ruthless predators with multiple
rows of razor-sharp teeth capable of rending prey in an instant. Their uncanny
ability to smell blood in the water means sharks might show up at any scene
of aquatic carnage.
Great White Shark
An apex predator among the coastal surface waters where it hunts, the great
white shark is one of the largest shark species. These silent killers glide gracefully
through the ocean, always in search of their next meal.
GREAT WHITE SHARK CREATURE 4
N HUGE ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +11; blood scent, scent (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +14, Stealth +12, Survival +9
Str +6, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –4
Blood Scent The shark can smell blood in the water from up to 1 mile away.
AC 21; Fort +12, Ref +10, Will +9
HP 60
Speed swim 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +14, Damage 1d12+8 piercing
Breach[two-actions] The shark Swims up to its swim Speed, then Leaps vertically out of the
water up to 25 feet high, making a Strike against a creature at any point during
the jump (this lets it attack a creature within 30 feet of the water’s surface). After
the Strike, the shark splashes back down into the water.
Savage [one-action] Requirement The shark hit with a jaws Strike on its most recent action
this turn. Effect The creature the shark hit takes 1d12 slashing damage.
Strafing Chomp [one-action] The shark Swims up to half its swim Speed, makes a
jaws Strike, and then Swims up to half its Speed further. The Strike
deals half damage.
Megalodon
Prehistoric sharks of incredible size, strength, and ferocity,
megalodons scour waters deep and shallow to sate their
considerable hunger. The presence of a megalodon undeniably affects
the local aquatic ecosystem.
MEGALODON CREATURE 9
UNCOMMON N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL AQUATIC
Perception +20; blood scent, scent (imprecise) 100 feet
Skills Athletics +21, Stealth +19, Survival +16
Str +8, Dex +2, Con +5, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha –2
Blood Scent As great white shark.
AC 27; Fort +21, Ref +16, Will +17
HP 180
Speed swim 80 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +22 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+10
piercing plus Improved Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +22 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage
2d8+10 piercing plus Push 15 feet
Breach [one-action] (attack, move) As great white
shark, but the megalodon’s reach allows
it to attack a creature up to 35 feet above the surface of the water
(or 40 feet with its tail).
Savage [one-action] As great white shark, but 2d12 slashing damage.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Huge, 2d8+5 bludgeoning, Rupture 20
S-T
293

292
ANCIENT GUARDIANS
The practice of conjuring and
binding shining children to
serve as guardians of important
locations was a popular one in
Thassilon. Even today, thousands
of years after this empire’s fall,
adventurers can still encounter
shining children in ancient ruins,
guarding treasures and forgotten
lore from the distant past.
Shining Child
Shining children are wicked, enigmatic monsters that roam remote planes
and untraveled corners of the universe in search of esoteric lore. With their
abnormally gaunt frames, long white hair, and unnerving, four-fingered hands,
shining children are both strangely familiar and otherworldly in appearance,
though they are barely visible within the shroud of blinding light they
continually emit. Their faces are truly horrible, however, as their overlarge
eyes and distended, gaping mouths reveal their heads to be voids filled with
unnatural light. Shining children use this light as a weapon, weaving illusions
and focusing beams of fiery brilliance.
Because of their reputation as scholars of the alien and the eldritch, shining
children are sometimes summoned by powerful wizards or occultists in search
of rare knowledge. The creatures never give away their lore without some price,
though, and typically demand in return the performance of contemptible deeds
that further their inscrutable, far-ranging plans.
These mysterious beings are natives of the Astral Plane. In that
vast plane, accretions of metaphysical matter gradually accumulate
and eventually coalesce into demiplanes. During this tumultuous
process, sparks of living light sometimes shear off the newly formed
planes, and these sparks of raw planar energy somehow transform
into shining children. Every newly formed demiplane leaves a different
mental imprint on its shining “offspring,” making it easy
for shining children to telepathically recognize their
brothers and sisters. Forever trapped in apparently
adolescent bodies, shining children dedicate themselves
to scholarship and violence with equal measure in a
futile effort to understand their roles in the multiverse
and the burning injustice of their births.
Shining children confuse most other creatures with
their refusal to use individual names in favor of alternating
between referring to each other singularly and collectively.
SHINING CHILD CREATURE 12
CE MEDIUM ASTRAL
Perception +23; darkvision
Languages Aklo; telepathy 120 feet
Skills Arcana +18, Deception +23, Diplomacy +21, Intimidation +21, Occultism +18
Str +2, Dex +5, Con +6, Int +2, Wis +5, Cha +7
Radiance Dependence The shining child is flat-footed while in areas of darkness.
AC 33; Fort +22, Ref +19, Will +19
HP 215; Immunities blinded, dazzled, fire
Blinding Aura (arcane, aura, incapacitation, light) 60 feet. The shining child
sheds bright light. Any creature that starts its turn in the aura must succeed at
a Fortitude DC 29 save. If it fails, it is blinded for 1 minute, and if it critically fails,
it’s permanently blinded. A creature that succeeds at its save is temporarily immune
to this effect for 24 hours.
Overwhelming Light [reaction] (light) Trigger The shining child enters an area of magical
darkness or begins its turn in an area of magical darkness. Effect The shining child
attempts to counteract the magical darkness (as a 7th-level spell).
Speed 30 feet, fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +25 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 3d4+5 bludgeoning plus 4d6 fire and
2d4 persistent fire
Melee [one-action] fire ray +25 (arcane, evocation, magical, range 100 feet), Damage 3d10+3 fire,
plus 2d10 positive damage if the target is undead
Occult Innate Spells DC 33; 7th spell turning, sunburst; 6th dispel magic, vibrant pattern,
wall of force; 5th dimension door, false vision, hallucinatory terrain; 4th dimension
door (at will; self only); 2nd illusory object (at will); Cantrips (6th) light
S-T
293

292
TEKELI-LI
While a shoggoth’s cacophony is
a bewildering and eldritch mix of
sound and dangerous secrets, the
phrase “tekeli-li” is the most oft
repeated cry, and these mysterious
words are always discernible
among their wild vocalizations.
Sometimes, wild birds that dwell in
places haunted by shoggoths seem
to cry out this strange phrase,
while at others it can be heard on
blasts of frozen winds. Attempts
to translate the phrase, even via
magic, have only ever met with
failure, as if the words themselves
actively resist revealing their
secrets to the world.
Shoggoth
Although even raving fanatics and doom-saying prophets desperately claim the
monstrous shoggoth is nothing more than a drug-induced vision or a thankfully
unreal nightmare, the truth is altogether more dire. Shoggoths exist, yet they tend
keep to the deepest of ocean trenches or the most remote of caverns and ruins,
emerging to spread chaos and destruction in their slimy wakes.
The first shoggoths were created by an alien species to serve as mindless beasts
of burden. Their vast bulk, incredible strength, and amorphous nature made them
useful slave labor, and their ability to spontaneously form whatever new eyes,
mouths, limbs, and other organs they might need made them incredibly versatile.
Eventually, the shoggoths developed enough intelligence to rebel against their
masters, and now they lurk, patient but potent, in the lightless deeps.
A shoggoth has goals and methods unknowable to humanoid beings. They
remember their eons of servitude and, compared to their mysterious masters,
humans, elves, dwarves and other intelligent beings are mere specks which crawl
upon the surface of the world, indistinguishable from animals. When a shoggoth
rolls its immense, hideous body over a band of explorers, engulfing them in a
gelatinous press of flesh and gnawing teeth, it is not so much evil as uncaring.
Shoggoths can become the object of worship for humanoid cults dedicated to
chaos and entropy. The shoggoth does not respond to this worship, but it can be
counted on to consume any hapless victim the cult can capture and sacrifice to it.
Rumors of shoggoths that have developed even greater intellects are, one would
hope, just that, for the damage a shoggoth capable of reasoning could wreak upon
a world is unsettling to say the least.
SHOGGOTH CREATURE 18
RARE CN HUGE ABERRATION AMPHIBIOUS
Perception +34; darkvision, scent (imprecise)
60 feet, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aklo
Skills Athletics +36, Intimidation +29
Str +10, Dex +6, Con +9, Int –3, Wis +6, Cha +1
AC 39, all-around vision; Fort +33, Ref +30,
Will +30; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 275, fast healing 20; Immunities
blinded, controlled, critical hits, deafened,
precision, sleep; Resistances acid 20, cold
20, sonic 20
Maddening Cacophony (auditory, aura,
incapacitation, mental) 60 feet. A shoggoth
constantly voices syllables and mutterings that
mortals were not meant to hear. A creature
entering the aura or starting its turn in
the aura must succeed at a DC 38 Will
save or become confused for 1 round (2d4
rounds on a critical failure). A creature that
successfully saves is temporarily immune
for 24 hours.
Speed 40 feet, climb 25 feet, swim 50 feet
Melee [one-action] pseudopod +35 (magical, reach 30 feet),
Damage 4d10+18 bludgeoning plus Grab
Constrict [one-action] 2d10+15 bludgeoning
Eat Away A creature that begins its
turn inside the shoggoth takes 9d6
acid damage.
Engulf[two-actions] DC 40, 6d6 acid, Escape DC 40,
Rupture 40
S-T
295

294
SHULN RESOURCES
Adventurers who fear encounters
with cave worms might seek out a
shuln and attempt to lure it along
or magically compel it to aid in
the fight to come, but the shulnʼs
stubborn personality makes such
efforts difficult and unreliable.
More often, acquiring the shulnʼs
saliva is an easier tactic, although
the poison must be alchemically
preserved if it is to be used as
an injury poison, for this foulsmelling liquid breaks down
quickly once it drools from the
shuln’s toothy maw.
Shuln
Scourges of the upper Darklands, these enormous, mole-like monstrosities slice
and burrow through solid stone with massive forearms and adamantine-strong
claws. Shulns grow to about 20 feet long and have four tiny, nearly imperceptible
eyes; a long, pale snout; four thick-muscled legs that end in long, serrated claws;
and a stubby pink tail. As a young shuln matures, its unique metabolism produces
adamantine that becomes infused throughout its skeletal system. In addition to
making their claws and fangs nearly unbreakable, this unique physiological trait
makes shulns unparalleled burrowers and highly sought by monster hunters who
hope to harvest the precious material from their corpses.
Shulns have a ravenous appetite and eat nearly anything they can catch, but
their preferred diet consists almost entirely of large invertebrates, especially
cave worms. They rely on tiny sensory whiskers that cover their snout  and
allow them to detect subtle movements in the air and ground without the
use of vision. When it detects suitable prey, a shuln bites the target at the first
opportunity, injecting it with a potent paralytic toxin present in its saliva. So
strong is this poison that it is capable of subduing even the near-unstoppable
purple worm, making the shuln a valuable (if dangerous) companion to have
for anyone making excursions into worm-infested regions of the Darklands.
Shulns’ notoriously ill-tempered dispositions and their knack for digging into
areas of an underground settlement where digging ought not occur makes them
frustrating creatures to keep around, but when the alternative is an unpredictable
but deadly visit from an enormous, hungry cave worm, the annoyances are well
worth the trouble.
Encounters with much larger shuln-like entities on the Plane of Earth suggest
that these creatures may have originated from that place. The larger shulns still
retain their elemental qualities, are quite a bit smarter, and have their own suite
of earth-themed innate primal spells-but for all that, they still love the taste of
cave worm.
SHULN CREATURE 12
RARE N HUGE BEAST
Perception +20; scent 30 feet, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Athletics +25, Survival +22
Str +7, Dex +4, Con +6, Int –3, Wis +4, Cha +1
AC 33; Fort +25, Ref +19, Will +21
HP 195; Resistances physical 10 (except
adamantine or bludgeoning), poison 15
Speed 40 feet, burrow 20 feet;
unstoppable burrow
Melee [one-action] adamantine claw +25 (agile,
reach 15 feet), Damage 3d8+10 slashing
Melee [one-action] adamantine fangs +25 (reach 15 feet),
Damage 3d10+10 piercing plus shuln saliva
Armor-Rending Any time the shuln scores a critical
hit with a melee Strike, it also deals the same amount
of damage to the target’s armor, bypassing any Hardness lower
than 10, like adamantine.
Shuln Saliva (incapacitation, poison);
Saving Throw DC 32 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 2d6 poison
damage and slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 2 3d6
poison damage, and slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 3 4d6 poison damage
and paralyzed for 2d6 hours. Shuln saliva overcomes the inexorable ability.
Unstoppable Burrow Shulns can burrow into solid rock and any metal with a hardness
less than that of adamantine like it is soil or loose rubble, leaving a tunnel 10 feet
in diameter.
S-T
295

294
SERVANTS OF SHELYN
While simurghs can be found in
the service of most good-aligned
faiths, it is the teachings of Shelyn,
goddess of art, to which these
creatures are most often drawn.
A temple of Shelyn that has
managed to attract the attention
and friendship of a simurgh
typically honors the creature’s
privacy and does not boast of the
alliance, yet won’t hesitate to call
for its aid in times of need.
Simurgh
Desert-dwelling people consider the sight of a simurgh a herald to a lifetime’s
worth of luck, and those who are unfamiliar with the majestic beast might
mistake it for the avatar of a deity. Beautiful, graceful, and truly gargantuan,
the simurgh resembles nothing so much as a massive multicolored bird with the
head of an equally enormous and regal lupine. Simurghs act as intermediaries in
world-threatening conflicts, serving as agents of good deities or vigilantes who
spread their own brand of justice, typically by obliterating or banishing evil
extraplanar beings.
Simurghs can live for thousands of years, and because these ancient beings are
so rare many doubt their existence. But they are very real, as those who have been
aided by a simurgh can enthusiastically attest. A simurgh does not show itself
often, but when it does, it is typically in response to a truly grave threat, such
as the incursion of an undead army or the rampage of some truly epic monster.
Simurghs are nothing if not paragons of righteousness, and goodly heroes can
hardly find a better ally in their quest to vanquish evil than a simurgh.
SIMURGH CR 18
RARE NG GARGANTUAN BEAST
Perception +32; darkvision
Languages Celestial, Common, Draconic; tongues
Skills Acrobatics +27, Arcana +28, Athletics +32, Diplomacy +34, Medicine +35, Perform
+28, Religion +35, Survival +32
Str +8, Dex +3, Con +6, Int +3, Wis +6, Cha +5
AC 41; Fort +30, Ref +29, Will +32; +1 status bonus to all saves vs. magic
HP 350; Immunities
disease, fire, negative
energy, sleep
Aura of Peace (divine,
emotion, enchantment,
incapacitation, mental)
50 feet. A creature that
starts its turn in the aura
must attempt a DC 37
Will save or be affected
by calm emotions. Creatures
that successfully save are
unaffected, but must attempt another
save each turn they start in the aura.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 40 feet, fly 90 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +34 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d12+12
piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +34 (agile, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d8+12 slashing
Melee [one-action] tail +34 (magical, reach 20 feet), Damage 4d8+10 slashing plus
banishing swipe
Ranged [one-action] glaring ray +34 (magical, range 100 feet), Damage 10d6 fire
Divine Innate Spells DC 42; 9th flame strike, heal; 3rd zone of truth (at will); 2nd detect
alignment (evil only; at will); 1st dazzling flash (Core Rulebook 391); Cantrips (9th)
detect magic, light; Constant tongues
Banishing Swipe If a creature hit by the simurgh’s tail Strike is not currently on its
home plane, it must succeed at a DC 42 Will save or be affected by banishment,
except that if the creature critically succeeds its save the simurgh is not stunned.
Radiant Feathers [two-actions] (attack); Frequency Once per day. Effect The simurgh fans
out its glimmering tail feathers and blasts its foes with a 100-foot cone of radiant
light. Aside from the size of the cone, this effect is identical to prismatic spray
(DC 42).
S-T
297

296
BORN OF SIN
Unable to procreate themselves,
sinspawn retreated from the world
for many centuries following the
collapse of the runelords’ empire, but
in recent years they have emerged
from ancient dungeons, strange
magical pools, and other forgotten
ruins. In certain cases, incredibly
powerful artifacts crafted by the
runelords known as runewells
can siphon off fragments of sinful
memories and emotions related to
the runewells’ associated sins from
the souls of people dying nearby,
fueling the spontaneous creation
of new sinspawn. When enough
sinful energies have been gathered
within a runewell, it vomits forth a
fully grown sinspawn with no prior
loyalty to a long-lost runelord. All
sinspawn inherently understand the
runewells’ role in the propagation of
their kind, and they often establish
small villages near awakened
runewells, hunting down sentient
beings they can use to propagate
their communities.
Sinspawn
Sinspawn were created by one of seven ancient wizards known collectively as
runelords-each of whom embraced and embodied one of seven sins. The first
sinspawn was created by the Runelord of Wrath, utilizing techniques that have
since gone on to influence fleshwarping practices (see fleshwarp on page 158). It
wasn’t long before the technique used to create sinspawn fell into the hands of the
other runelords, and while each tried their own hand at crafting variants of their
own design, today sinspawn of wrath remain the most numerous and notorious
of their kind.
Bearing only a vague resemblance to the humanoids from whose flesh they were
formed, sinspawn generally appear horrifically emaciated and have unnaturally
long arms and digitigrade legs, each with a trio of stubby, taloned digits. Veins
bulge across sinspawn’s bodies in sanguine patterns that suspiciously resemble
twisted runes, and their flesh is pale and hairless. Their heads are elongated,
bearing only slits for a nose, red eyes, and disturbing lower jaws that split in half
at the chin, revealing pedipalps that end in tiny, three-fingered hands and framing
a long, lolling tongue.
Sinspawn stand 6-1/2 feet tall and typically weigh as much as an emaciated
human of their size. They behave in a manner consistent with their associated
sin and have physical characteristics that hint at these qualities. For example,
greedspawn’s veins appear to run with gold while envyspawn appear even more
wasted than the rest of their kin.
Sinspawn Sins
When a sinspawn is created, it becomes associated with one of the seven sins:
envoy, gluttony, greed, lust, pride, sloth, or wrath. A sinspawn’s sin is determined
by the runewell that spawned it or by its creator’s preferred sin, and cannot be
changed. Each sin grants sinspawn associated with it additional benefits and
abilities beyond those described by the sinspawn stat block, as detailed below.
Envyspawn
An envyspawn has Deception +7 and typically carries a halberd. They tend to be
shorter and thinner than other sinspawn.
Melee [one-action] halberd +10 (reach 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d10+4 piercing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against an envyspawn’s sinful bite are
enfeebled 2 for 1 minute.
Gluttonyspawn
A gluttonyspawn has Survival +10 and usually carries a scythe. They are obese,
but hardy and strong.
Melee [one-action] scythe +10 (deadly d10, trip), Damage 1d10+4 slashing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a gluttonyspawn’s sinful bite
are drained 1.
Greedspawn
A greedspawn has Thievery +9 and typically wields a glaive. They are the tallest
of sinspawn, often 7 feet in height, and with gold-tinged veins.
Melee [one-action] glaive +10 (deadly d8, forceful, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+4 slashing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a greedspawn’s sinful bite are
clumsy 2 for 1 minute.
Lustspawn
A lustspawn has Diplomacy +7 and usually carries a guisarme. They have
attractive bodies, but hideous faces.
Melee [one-action] guisarme +10 (reach 10 feet, trip), Damage 1d10+4 slashing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a lustspawn’s sinful bite are
stupefied 2 for 1 minute.
S-T
297

296
SINSPAWN LOCATIONS
Sinspawn are found in regions
where sources for their creation
remain buried in ancient ruins-in
Golarion, this currently limits them
to the frontier lands of Varisia.
But as they spread, so to does the
potential knowledge of crafting
more of them, and fleshwarpers
around the world are hoping to
someday soon craft new sinspawn
of their own.
Pridespawn
A pridespawn has Intimidation +7 and often wields a maul. They are nearly
skeletal in their gauntness, and often seek out fine clothes or jewelry to wear,
taking strange pleasure in appearing elegant and regal.
Melee [one-action] maul +10 (shove), Damage 1d12+4 bludgeoning
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a pridespawn’s sinful bite are
clumsy 1 and enfeebled 1 for 1 minute.
Slothspawn
A slothspawn has Society +6 and usually carries a longspear. Thick rolls of excess
skin drape the slothspawn’s hunched frame.
Melee [one-action] longspear +10 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a slothspawn’s sinful bite take
a –10-foot status penalty to their Speeds for 1 minute.
Wrathspawn
The most commonly encountered of the sinspawn, a wrathspawn has
Athletics +12 and typically wields a ranseur. These sinspawn are the
bulkiest looking of their kind.
Melee [one-action]ranseur +10 (disarm, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+4 piercing
Sinful Bite Creatures that critically fail their saves against a
wrathspawn’s sinful bite are drained 1 as well as enfeebled
1 for 1 minute.
SINSPAWN CREATURE 2
NE MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +10, darkvision, sin scent
(imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Aklo
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +8, Stealth
+9, Survival +6
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items one weapon determined by its sin
Sin Scent A sinspawn can smell creatures
that reflect its sin, as the scent ability.
The GM determines which creatures are
appropriately sinful.
AC 18; Fort +10, Ref +9, Will +6, +1 status to
saves vs. magic, +4 status to saves vs. mental
HP 30; Immunities controlled; Resistances
mental 5
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (agile), Damage 1d8+4 piercing plus sinful bite
Melee [one-action] claw +10, Damage 1d6+4 slashing
Sinful Bite (arcane, emotion, mental) A creature hit by the jaws of
a sinspawn must attempt a DC 18 Will save as it is assailed by
sinful thoughts.
Success Sickened 1.
Critical Success Unaffected.
Failure Sickened 2.
Critical Failure Sickened 2 plus an additional penalty, determined
by the sinspawn’s sin, while it remains sickened.
Sin A sinspawn gains an additional skill based on its sin, as well
as a weapon that reflects the preferences of its kinds’ ancient
creators. The seven sins and the benefits they confer upon a
sinspawn are noted in the Sinspawn Sins section.
S-T
299

298
CREATING SKELETONS
Start with a skeleton of the
appropriate size. (Gargantuan
skeletons can use skeletal hulk with
the elite template, Gargantuan size,
and 5 feet more reach.) Add Strikes,
Speeds, or other abilities it would
gain from its shape. For instance,
a chimera skeleton might have a
horn attack with its goat head and
jaw attacks with its dragon and lion
heads, but not a fist attack.
Skeleton
Made from bones held together by foul necromancy, skeletons are among the most
common types of undead, found haunting old dungeons and forgotten cemeteries.
Skeleton Abilities
Most skeletons have one of these abilities. If you give a skeleton more, you might
want to increase its level and adjust its statistics.
Bloody The skeleton is covered in dripping blood and gains fast healing equal to its level.
Collapse [reaction] Trigger The skeleton is critically hit. Effect The skeleton collapses into a
pile of bones and the attack deals only normal damage. The skeleton can reform in a
standing position as an action, but until it does, it is immobilized and flat-footed.
Explosive Death When the skeleton is destroyed, its bones shatter and explode as the
necromantic energy holding it together is released. Adjacent creatures take 1d6 slashing
damage per 2 levels (minimum 1d6) with a basic Reflex save.
Screaming Skull [two-actions](auditory, emotion, fear, mental) The skeleton removes its skull and
throws it, making a jaws attack with a range of 20 feet. It then attempts to Demoralize
each foe within 10 feet of the target. The head bounces, rolls, or even flies back, returning
to the skeleton at the start of its next turn. The skeleton is blind until then.
Skeleton Guard
The most common skeletal minions are mere guardians.
SKELETON GUARD CREATURE –1
NE MEDIUM MINDLESS SKELETON UNDEAD
Perception +2; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +3
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha +0
Items scimitar, shortbow (20 arrows)
AC 16; Fort +2, Ref +8, Will +2
HP 4, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease,
mental, paralyzed, poison, unconscious; Resistances cold 5,
electricity 5, fire 5, piercing 5, slashing 5
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] scimitar +6 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d6+2 slashing
Melee [one-action] claw +6 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+2 slashing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +6 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
Skeletal Champion
These skeletons retain the cunning they possessed in life.
SKELETAL CHAMPION CREATURE 2
NE MEDIUM SKELETON UNDEAD
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +8, Intimidation +7
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items chain mail, steel shield (Hardness 5, HP 20, BT 10), lance, longsword
AC 19 (21 with shield raised); Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 25, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Resistances cold 5, electricity 5, fire 5, piercing 5, slashing 5
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Shield Block [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] longsword +10 (versatile P), Damage 1d8+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+4 slashing
Melee [one-action] lance +10 (deadly d8, jousting d6, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
S-T
299

298
UNLIFE WITHOUT FLESH
The necromantic energies that
infuse animated undead skeletons
give them the ability to see
without eyes and move without
muscles. Despite being mindless,
skeletons’ instinct to evil comes
from their corrupt vital essence,
perverting negative energy for
creation rather than destruction.
Skeletal Horse
Skeletal horses are sometimes used as mounts by other undead or monsters.
SKELETAL HORSE CREATURE 2
NE LARGE MINDLESS SKELETON UNDEAD
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +9
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha +0
AC 16; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +8
HP 33, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Resistances cold 5, electricity 5, fire 5, piercing 5, slashing 5
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] hoof +9, Damage 1d8+5 bludgeoning
Gallop [two-actions] The horse Strides twice, with its Speed increased by 10 feet.
Undead Steed Undead and creatures allied with them can Command a skeletal
steed without needing to attempt a skill check.
Skeletal Giant
The reanimated bones of giants make excellent necromantic thralls.
SKELETAL GIANT CREATURE 3
NE LARGE MINDLESS SKELETON UNDEAD
Perception +7; darkvision
Skills Athletics +12, Intimidation +9
Str +5, Dex +1, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha +2
Items glaive, half plate
AC 17; Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +7
HP 50, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental,
paralyzed, poison, unconscious; Resistances cold 5,
electricity 5, fire 5, piercing 5, slashing 5
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] glaive +12 (deadly d8, forceful, reach 15
feet), Damage 1d8+7 slashing
Melee [one-action] horns +12 (agile), Damage 1d10+5 piercing
Broad Swipe [two-actions] The giant makes two Strikes with its
glaive against two adjacent foes, both of whom are
within its reach. The multiple attack penalty does
not increase until after both attacks are resolved.
Terrifying Charge [two-actions] The giant Strides and makes a horns Strike with a +4 circumstance
bonus to damage. If the strike hits, the giant attempts to Demoralize the target.
Skeletal Hulk
Huge giants and other enormous creatures make powerful skeletons.
SKELETAL HULK CREATURE 7
NE HUGE MINDLESS SKELETON UNDEAD
Perception +16; darkvision
Skills Athletics +20, Intimidation +15
Str +7, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 25; Fort +15, Ref +15, Will +13
HP 105, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Resistances cold 5, electricity 5, fire 5, piercing 5, slashing 5
Speed 30 feet
[one-action] Melee claw +18 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6+11 slashing
[two-actions]Broad Swipe As skeletal giant, but with its claw Strike.
[two-actions] Massive Rush The hulk Strides and makes a claw Strike with a +4 circumstance
bonus to damage. If the strike hits, the hulk automatically Shoves the target 10 feet.
S-T
301

300
SKULLTAKER INSIGHT
The cooperation of a skulltaker is
a powerful asset, for this whirling
mass of death knows the collective
memories of the creatures whose
bones form its body. Because
mountain travelers come from
far and wide, the breadth of a
skulltaker’s knowledge is often
vast, spanning a range of topics.
Skulltaker
Swirling down from misty peaks and through howling mountain passes
like an evil wind, the vortex of bones known as a skulltaker is a terrible
manifestation of the delirium and agony experienced by doomed climbers and
lost trailblazers just before they met their end. In some places, a skulltaker is
also known as a saxra.
SKULLTAKER CREATURE 18
UNCOMMON NE HUGE UNDEAD
Perception +33; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Necril; Skeletal Lore languages
Skills Acrobatics +34, Intimidation +35, Religion +30, Skeletal Lore +30, Stealth +32
Str +8, Dex +6, Con +6, Int +2, Wis +8, Cha +7
Skeletal Lore (divination, divine) A skulltaker taps into the memories of the creatures
whose bones make up its body. This gives it the Skeletal Lore skill, which it can use
to Recall Knowledge of any kind. In addition, it can speak and understand all the
languages known by the creatures whose bones make up its body (typically including
Common and the regional language of the skulltakerʼs home region). The skulltaker can
use Skeletal Lore as the primary skill check for the legend lore ritual (Core Rulebook
413), and it can cast legend lore without secondary casters.
AC 42; Fort +31, Ref +33, Will +35; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 300; Immunities cold, death effects, disease, paralyzed, poison, unconscious;
Resistances piercing 15, slashing 15
Shard Storm (air, aura, divine, necromancy) 10 feet. A cloud of bone shards surrounds
the skulltaker. When a creature moves into the emanation or begins its
turn there, shard storm attempts to counteract any death ward effect on
the creature (+30 counteract modifier) and then deals 4d6 slashing
damage and 4d6 negative damage to the creature, with a DC 40 basic
Reflex save.
Speed 30 feet, fly 60 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +35 (deadly 2d12, magical, reach 10 feet),
Damage 3d10+14 piercing plus 3d6 negative and energy drain
Melee [one-action] claw +35 (agile, deadly 2d12, magical, reach
15 feet), Damage 3d6+14 slashing plus 3d6 negative and
energy drain
Ranged [one-action] bone javelin +33 (magical, thrown 100 feet),
Damage 3d8+6 piercing plus 3d6 negative
Divine Innate Spells DC 40; 8th finger of death (×2), horrid
wilting (×2), punishing winds (×2); Constant (6th) true seeing
Divine Rituals DC 40; legend lore
Bonetaker (divine, necromancy) Whenever a creature
dies within 60 feet of a skulltaker, the skulltaker
draws a portion of the creature’s bones into its
shard storm. The creature must succeed at a DC 40 Will save or rise as a
skeletal champion (page 298) in 1d4 rounds. These skeletal champions
are controlled by the skulltaker.
Energy Drain (divine, necromancy) When a skulltaker hits with a melee
Strike, the target must succeed at a DC 40 Fortitude save or become
drained 2 and doomed 1.
Splintered Ground [one-action] The skulltaker causes splintered bones to erupt from all
solid surfaces in a 100-foot emanation, except for surfaces of worked stone.
A creature moving through the bones takes 10 piercing damage and 10 negative
damage for every 5 feet of movement. The first time each round a creature takes piercing
damage from these splintered bones, it must succeed at a Reflex save or take a –10-foot
circumstance penalty to all Speeds for 10 minutes, or a –15-foot circumstance penalty for
24 hours on a critical failure. The bones remain in place until the skulltaker uses this action
again or the bones are manually removed, which takes 10 minutes for each 5-foot square. 
S-T
301

300
SLURK RIDING
A willing or broken slurk can be
used as a mount by a creature at
least one size smaller than the
slurk. A slurk’s back slime grants
its rider a +2 circumstance bonus
against any attempts to physically
dismount the rider.
Slurk
The slurk is a sticky, tusked frog-beast found in underground lairs and caves. It
has two massive tusks, which it uses to gore prey and tangle with rival slurks.
With the slurk’s natural ability to climb walls and cling effortlessly to ceilings, it
can be easy for unwary cave explorers to end up on the wrong end of the beast’s
formidable ivory tusks.
Slurks exude two very different types of foul-smelling secretions from their
pale white skin. Large pustules on the slurk’s back drip a sticky resin-like slime
that quickly hardens upon exposure to air. By flexing its skin, the slurk can
burst these pustules in the direction of intruders, covering its foes in sticky
goo and severely limiting their ability to withstand the monster’s other attacks,
including the effects of its other secretion. Glands along the slurk’s ventral side
excrete an incredibly slippery and fetid grease, which protects the slurk from
the immobilizing effects of its own back slime but also has the added benefit of
making it extremely difficult to grapple and capture. The best way to discover
if a slurk is in the vicinity is to look for hard clumps of such grease, which
accumulate and dry in cave corners and amid rock piles where the slurk rests
between meals.
Slurks are thought to be descendants of a failed dwarven attempt to domesticate
and breed large subterranean frogs as food and labor animals. Despite this
apparent failure, slurks are often befriended by others who live underground.
The sticky frog-beasts have proven extremely desirable to kobolds, who now
domesticate and train slurks as powerful mounts and guardians. While other
creatures, particularly boggards, sometimes train slurks to serve as guardians,
kobolds remain those who use these creatures the most. A kobold mounted on
a slurk will often hide in the upper ledges of a cave, using the advantages of
height and surprise to harry foes with ranged attacks. Kobold riders also take
advantage of the slurk’s ability to climb, and charge at their enemies from the
walls of a cavern.
SLURK CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Draconic (can’t speak any language)
Skills Acrobatics +6 (+8 to Escape), Athletics +8, Stealth +5
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +0, Cha +0
AC 17; Fort +10 (+12 vs. Grapple or Shove), Ref +6, Will +4
HP 35
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] tusks +11 (deadly 1d10), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] slime squirt +9 (range increment 30 feet), Effect
entangling slime
Belly Grease [three-actions]The slurk extrudes a slippery grease
from its ventral glands to coat the floor under it
and in a 5-foot emanation, turning the affected
area into uneven ground for 10 minutes, after
which it dries to a putrid crust. The
DC to Balance across the slime is 18.
Entangling Slime A creature struck
by a slurk’s slime squirt becomes
clumsy 1 and takes a –5-foot penalty
to Speed for 1 hour or until the slime is
removed. The slime can be removed with
a total of three Interact actions by the
entangled creature or creatures adjacent to
the creature. These actions don’t need to be
consecutive or made by the same creature.
S-T
303

302
SNAKE RESOURCES
Snakeskin’s distinctive pattern
and wide variety of applications
makes it a sought-after resource,
and the hides of extra-large snakes
such as giant anacondas can fetch
a fine price in the right market.
Such oversized snake hides can be
used to craft clothing of snakeskin
leather, including boots and gloves,
as well as other items such as
scabbards, backpacks, and even
tents or makeshift boats.
A snake’s hide can be cleanly
removed with a successful Crafting
check or appropriate Lore check.
Snake
Snakes come in an array of forms, from jungle-dwelling constrictors that wrap
around their prey to venomous vipers with deadly bites. Regardless, all snakes
consume their prey whole by unhinging their jaws and using powerful muscles to
move the food down their throats and into their stomachs.
Viper
Each member of this family of venomous snakes has long, hinged fangs that inject
potent venom in their prey. Different vipers inject different types of venom, which
might result in paralysis, extreme pain and swelling, blood clotting, or even the
sudden stopping of the victim’s heart.
VIPER CREATURE –1
N TINY ANIMAL
Perception +5; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +1 (+4 to Climb), Stealth +5, Survival +3
Str –3, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 15; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 8
Slink [reaction] Trigger A creature ends its movement adjacent to the viper or within the viper’s
space. Effect The viper Strides, Climbs, or Swims up to 10 feet (or up to the relevant
Speed, if that Speed is less than 10 feet). It must end its movement in a location that
isn’t within 5 feet of a foe. This movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +8 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d8–3 piercing plus viper venom
Viper Venom (poison) Saving Throw DC 16 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4 rounds;
Stage 1 1d8 poison (1 round).
Ball Python
This nonvenomous snake’s name comes
from its tendency to curl into a ball when
frightened, though most people know it
for its hunting tactic of coiling around
prey and crushing victims with its
powerful muscles. Nonetheless,
brave herpetologists sometimes
keep ball pythons as pets.
BALL PYTHON CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +6; low-light vision,
scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +6,
Stealth +6, Survival +4
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 16; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +4
HP 20
Tighten Coils [reaction] Trigger A creature grabbed or
restrained by the ball python attempts to Escape. Effect
The DC of the Escape check is increased by 2.
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +8, Damage 1d8+3 piercing plus Grab
Constrict [one-action] 1d8 bludgeoning, DC 17
Wrap in Coils [one-action] Requirement A Medium or smaller creature is grabbed or
restrained in the ball python’s jaws. Effect The ball python moves the creature into its
coils, freeing its jaws to make attacks, then uses Constrict against the creature. The
ball python’s coils can hold one creature.
S-T
303

302
SNAKES IN MYTHOLOGY
Snakes appear frequently
and prominently in the myths
and legends of many cultures
throughout the Inner Sea region.
In Ancient Osirion, snakes were
revered and associated both with
the evil serpent god Apep and the
good goddess Wadjet, the Green
Empress. Perhaps the best-known
example of snakes in Golarion’s
legends are the serpentfolk-
serpentine humanoids who ruled
vast swaths of the world in
prehistoric times and worshipped a
foul snake deity called Ydersius.
Giant Viper
The giant viper’s fangs are a frightening sight, with injection tubes as long as
daggers. The sheer amount of venom injected by a giant viper can cause severe
blood clotting and leave a victim utterly drained of vitality.
GIANT VIPER CREATURE 2
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +8, Stealth +8, Survival +6
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +3, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha –2
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +11, Will +6
HP 26
Coiled Opportunity [reaction] As Attack of Opportunity, but the snake can use this reaction
only if it’s Coiled.
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet, swim 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +11 (finesse), Damage 1d8+3 piercing plus giant viper venom
Coil [one-action] The giant viper uses an action to coil itself, increasing its reach with its fangs
from 5 to 10 feet. After the giant viper Strikes with its fangs, it becomes uncoiled.
Giant Viper Venom (poison) Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d6 poison (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison and drained 1.
Giant Anaconda
The monstrous giant anaconda is capable of swallowing whole creatures as
big as horses-to say nothing of their riders. Although novice bushwhackers
watch out for snakes that might drop on them from the jungle canopy above,
giant anacondas are most commonly encountered in ponds and rivers, where
they feed on prey including manatees and capybaras.
GIANT ANACONDA CREATURE 8
N HUGE ANIMAL
Perception +17; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 60 feet
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +21, Stealth +15, Survival +15
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +6, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha –2
AC 25; Fort +20, Ref +17, Will +15
HP 175
Tighten Coils [reaction] As ball python.
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet, swim 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +21 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+7
piercing plus Grab
Melee [one-action] tail +21 (agile, reach 15 feet), Damage
2d8+7 bludgeoning plus Push 10 feet
Greater Constrict [one-action] 1d10+7 bludgeoning,
DC 26
Slither [one-action] The giant anaconda Strides,
Climbs, or Swims up to half its
Speed, pulling any creatures it has
grabbed with it.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) Large,
1d10+7 bludgeoning, Rupture 21
Wrap in Coils [one-action] (attack); Requirement
A Large or smaller creature is
grabbed or restrained in the giant
anaconda’s jaws. Effect The giant anaconda
moves the creature into its coils, freeing its jaws
to make attacks, then uses Greater Constrict against
the creature. The giant anaconda’s coils can hold as many
creatures as will fit in its space.
S-T
305

304
INNATE SPELLS
A soulbound doll’s additional
3rd‑level innate spell depends on
its alignment, as listed below.
Lawful Good: zone of truth
Neutral Good: heroism
Chaotic Good: heal
Lawful Neutral: nondetection
Neutral: wall of thorns
Chaotic Neutral: grease
Lawful Evil: chilling darkness
Neutral Evil: harm
Chaotic Evil: vampiric touch
Soulbound Doll
Soulbound dolls are eerie mannequins or playthings that have been imbued with a
small piece of a deceased mortal’s soul. These little constructs are created for a variety
of reasons-such as to serve as companions or servants-but their free will means
their obedience to their creators is hardly a given. Followers of Pharasma generally
abhor soulbound dolls, viewing them as a perversion of the natural cycle of souls,
and those who worship the Lady of Graves see the destruction of a soulbound doll,
regardless of the construct’s alignment, as an important service to the Great Beyond.
Soulbound dolls are the simplest in a series of soulbound constructs including
human-sized soulbound mannequins, powerful soulbound shells, and sentinel
soulbound terra-cotta warriors. Creating them from unwilling living creatures
is evil, and an unwilling donor can resist the process with a successful Will save
against the creator’s Craft DC, ruining the doll if not preventing the donor’s
death. A non-evil doll can only be crafted from the soul of a person who has given
consent to such use before their death occurred.
Soulbound dolls encountered by adventurers are typically guardians of some
sort; despite their diminutive size, the soul fragment’s power makes the doll’s
fist more dangerous than a casual observer would expect. Further, it grants the
doll a single spell of outsized power given its stature. Because of their autonomy
and remarkable intelligence, soulbound dolls are occasionally employed by their
crafters as administrators over much more powerful but mindless constructs such
as golems, allowing such dolls to control defenses far beyond their own capabilities.
Though soulbound dolls contain a small fragment of a soul extracted
during or shortly after a person’s death, this doesn’t affect the deceased’s
resurrection or progress to the afterlife. This extraction process is lethal
to otherwise-living prospective soul donors, though there are rumors of
more expensive processes that allows someone to donate a fragment
of a living soul without repercussions.
The soul fragment resides in a soul focus gem (Hardness 10) typically
embedded in the doll’s neck or chest. The soul fragment isn’t static, and
the doll continues to learn from its initial state, meaning its personality
and abilities can change, possibly growing closer to the donor’s or
moving farther afield on its own individual path. The soulbound doll’s
focus gem retains the doll’s memories even after the doll’s destruction.
The the intact soul focus gem of a destroyed doll can even be placed
into a new doll body by someone knowledgeable in the creation of
soulbound creatures, effectively reconstituting the soulbound doll.
SOULBOUND DOLL CREATURE 2
ANY TINY CONSTRUCT SOULBOUND
Perception +8; darkvision
Languages one spoken by its creator (typically Common)
Skills Acrobatics +8, Occultism +4, Stealth +8
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Personality Fragments A soulbound doll shares fragments of its
donor soul’s personality, though none of that creature’s memories. This
causes a soulbound doll to match the donor soul’s alignment and gain the
corresponding alignment traits.
AC 20; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +6
HP 23; Immunities bleed, death effects, disease, doomed, drained,
fatigued, healing, mental, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed,
poison, sickened, unconscious
Speed 20 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +10 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Occult Innate Spells DC 18, attack +8; 3rd levitate, one additional spell
depending on the donor soul’s alignment (see sidebar); Cantrips (1st) light,
mage hand, prestidigitation
S-T
305

304
SPHINX RIDDLES
Sphinxes are well-known for their
love of riddles, a love that often
moves beyond into the realm of
obsession. A would-be foe who can
answer a sphinx’s favorite riddles,
or better yet, can stump the
sphinx with a crafty and creative
riddle of their own, can often avoid
combat with the monster as well
as secure its aid.
Sphinx
Sphinxes are mystical beings with the body of a lion, the wings of a great bird,
and the upper torso and head of a human. They are often maligned in legends as
nothing more than monsters, and though they are quick to anger and are capable
of exacting deadly retribution for perceived slights, they are also very intelligent.
Sphinxes are often associated with desert regions, but they can dwell in more
moderate climates as well. They form small groups consisting of a single, extended
family that hunts and works together to protect and teach their young. As they
mature, sphinxes develop a wanderlust, a drive to gather hidden lore and solve the
world’s greatest riddles-the trait that is perhaps most often identified with their kind.
While sometimes bound into service as guardians for powerful spellcasters,
lone sphinxes may also be encountered on journeys of discovery and as purveyors
of esoteric lore. If treated with the proper respect-and fed well-a sphinx can
demonstrate a willingness to exchange information. Their favorite currency is,
of course, riddles and secrets. One who can trade knowledge for knowledge has
a much better chance of succeeding while bargaining with a sphinx. However,
a sphinx’s insatiable thirst for new riddles as well their extensive collection of
secrets accumulated over hundreds of years of life-makes it difficult to offer them
something they don’t already know. Those who attempt to trade petty insight and
stale riddles may invoke a sphinx’s ire and will not live long enough to regret it.
SPHINX CREATURE 8
N LARGE BEAST
Perception +18, darkvision; detect magic, see invisibility
Languages Common, Draconic, Sphinx; comprehend language
Skills Arcana +17, Athletics +18, Bardic Lore +19, Deception +16, Diplomacy +16,
Intimidation +18, Occultism +17
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +5, Wis +4, Cha +4
Bardic Lore Sphinxes are naturally curious, and their love of puzzles and
mysteries leads them to gather information on a broad range of topics.
Sphinxes have the Bardic Lore bard feat, allowing them to
Recall Knowledge on any topic.
AC 27; Fort +16, Ref +14, Will +19
HP 135
Speed 35 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +20 (agile), Damage 2d6+9 slashing
Occult Innate Spells DC 27; 4th clairaudience (at will), clairvoyance
(at will), read omens, remove curse; 3rd dispel magic, locate; Cantrips
(4th) detect magic; Constant (5th) tongues; (2nd) see invisibility
Claw Rake [three-actions] The sphinx rears back on their hind legs and makes
two claw Strikes at the same target, using the same attack bonus
as their highest melee attack. If both attacks deal damage, the
target takes extra damage equal to one claw Strike.
Pounce [one-action] The sphinx Strides and makes a Strike at the end of that movement.
If the sphinx began this action hidden, they remain hidden until after the
attack.
Warding Glyph Once per week, a Sphinx can create a magical symbol as though
casting a heightened glyph of warding spell. The sphinx usually shapes the
glyph to take the form of a written riddle, and sets the password to the
answer. A creature that gives the wrong answer or tries to pass without
answering must succeed at a DC 26 Will save or suffer one of
the following spell effects, chosen by the sphinx when
creating the symbol: synaptic pulse (5th), charm
(4th), fear (3rd), phantom pain (3rd), sleep (3rd).
The sphinx learns the identity of any creature
that answers the riddle and tends to be friendly
to them.
S-T
307

306
ASSOCIATED MONSTERS
Though they are vermin incapable
of forming true alliances, spiders
show up alongside many types
of creatures, including web
lurkers (page 325). Spellcasters
sometimes call upon spiders
using summon animal, and spider
swarms have a way of popping up
just about anywhere at the most
inopportune times.
Spider
Few everyday vermin inspire as much dread as the infamous spider.
Spider Swarm
An abundance of food, the sudden hatching of a clutch of eggs, or magical
influence can cause smaller spiders to gather in terrifying, deadly masses.
SPIDER SWARM CREATURE 0
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +4; darkvision, web sense
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +2, Stealth +5
Str –2, Dex +3, Con +0, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –4
Web Sense The spider swarm has imprecise tremorsense to detect the vibrations of
creatures touching its web.
AC 15; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +2
HP 12; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses area damage 5, splash damage
5; Resistances bludgeoning 2, piercing 5, slashing 5
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet
Swarming Bites [one-action] Each enemy in the spider swarm’s space takes 1d4 piercing damage with
a DC 14 basic Reflex save. A creature that fails its save is exposed to spider swarm venom.
Spider Swarm Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude DC 14; Maximum Duration
4 rounds; Stage 1 1 poison and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 2 1d4 poison and
enfeebled 1 (1 round).
Hunting Spider
Hunting spiders are the most common type of giant
spider, though not the largest.
HUNTING SPIDER CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; darkvision, web sense
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +5, Stealth +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –4
Web Sense As spider swarm.
AC 17; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +5
HP 16
Spring Upon Prey [reaction] (attack); Requirement
Initiative has not yet been rolled. Trigger A
creature touches the hunting spider’s web
while the spider is on it. Effect The hunting
spider automatically notices the creature
and Strides, Climbs, or Descends on a Web
before it rolls initiative.
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +9 (finesse), Damage
1d6+2 piercing plus hunting spider
venom
Ranged [one-action] web +7 (range increment 30
feet), Effect web trap
Descend on a Web [one-action] (move) The
hunting spider moves straight down
up to 40 feet, suspended by a web line.
It can hang from the web or drop off. The
distance it Descends on a Web doesn’t count
for falling damage. A creature that successfully
Strikes the web (AC 20, Hardness 3, 5 HP) severs it, causing the
spider to fall.
S-T
307

306
OTHER GIANT SPIDERS
A staggering number of species
of giant spider exist in the world.
Some, like the dream spider,
whose venom creates strange
hallucinations, are relatively small.
Others, like the lumbering ogre
spider, are larger than horses.
Hunting Spider Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude DC 16; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d10 poison and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 2 1d12 poison, clumsy 1, and flat-footed
(1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison, clumsy 2, and flat-footed (1 round).
Web Trap A creature hit by the hunting spider’s web attack is immobilized and stuck to
the nearest surface until it Escapes (DC 17).
Giant Tarantula
Tarantulas are ambush predators, but will attack prey in the open.
GIANT TARANTULA CREATURE 6
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +14; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +16, Stealth +11
Str +6, Dex +1, Con +5, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –4
AC 21; Fort +15, Ref +13, Will +10
HP 135
Speed 30 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +17, Damage 2d8+8 piercing plus giant tarantula venom
Melee [one-action] leg +17 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12+8 bludgeoning plus Knockdown
Hair Barrage [two-actions] The tarantula flicks its legs, flinging spiky hairs in a 15-foot cone.
This deals 4d6 piercing damage with a DC 25 basic Reflex save.
Giant Tarantula Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude DC 23; Maximum Duration
8 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison, flat-footed, and clumsy
1 (1 round); Stage 3 1d6 poison, flat-footed, and clumsy 2; Stage 4 1d6 poison and
paralyzed (1 round).
Goliath Spider
Goliath spiders dwell in the deepest jungles, where they build webs as big as
temples and feast on prey as large as hippopotami.
GOLIATH SPIDER CREATURE 11
N GARGANTUAN ANIMAL
Perception +22; darkvision, web sense
Skills Acrobatics +18, Athletics +23, Stealth +22
Str +8, Dex +5, Con +7, Int –5, Wis +3, Cha –4
Web Sense As spider swarm.
AC 30; Fort +25, Ref +21, Will +17
HP 220
Spring Upon Prey [reaction] (attack) As hunting spider.
Speed 45 feet, climb 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +24 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d12+12 piercing plus
goliath spider venom
Ranged [one-action] web +22 (range increment 60 feet), Effect web tether
Descend on a Web [one-action] (move) As hunting spider, but the
goliath spider can descend 120 feet and the web has AC
20, Hardness 5, and 20 HP.
Goliath Spider Venom (incapacitation, poison); Saving
Throw Fortitude DC 30; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 2d6 poison and slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 2 2d6 poison and
slowed 2 (1 round); Stage 3 paralyzed for 2d4 hours.
Web Tether A creature hit by the spider’s web Strike is
restrained and tethered to the spider, preventing it from
moving farther away from the spider. The spider can
have one creature tethered at a time. The DC to
Escape or Force Open the web is 30. The tether
can be severed with a Strike (AC 20, Hardness 5,
HP 20), but this doesn’t free the restrained creature.
S-T
309

308
SPRITE PRANKS
Sprite pranks tend to be
kind‑hearted in nature; they might
use their abilities to embarrass
a braggart or to trick them into
a convoluted scheme to help
someone notice an admirer who
has been there for them all along.
Their plans are often half-baked;
sprites’ mercurial nature means
they can easily become distracted
by something new before following
through on a previous plan.
Sprite
Elusive, flighty, and ebullient, sprites are what many villagers first imagine when
they hear the terms “fey” or “fairy.” While their dispositions vary from the
benevolent grig to the trickster pixie, all sprites share a connection to magic and
diminutive size. This family of fey shares its name with its slightest and most
populous member, the common sprite.
Sprite
Common sprites are primeval guardians that latch onto a person, place, or object
and defend it for their own inscrutable reasons. Their dispositions vary from kind
to spiteful, but all sprites have a capricious streak. Being only about 9 inches tall,
they are wary of animals that might hunt them, particularly house cats, and prefer
flight to a fight. On the other hand, sprites are incredibly curious about all forms
of magic and heedlessly gather around ley line nexuses or other places of power.
SPRITE CREATURE –1
CN TINY FEY SPRITE
Perception +4; low-light vision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +6, Stealth +6
Str –3, Dex +4, Con +0, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha +2
Items rapier
Luminous Fire (evocation, light, primal) A sprite naturally sheds light like a
torch. The sprite can extinguish, rekindle, or change the color of this
light using a single action, which has the concentrate trait. While
this light is extinguished, the sprite’s Strikes don’t deal fire damage
and they can’t use their luminous spark Strike.
AC 15; Fort +2, Ref +8, Will +4
HP 11; Weaknesses cold iron 3
Speed 10 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] rapier +8 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse, fire, magical), Damage
1d6–3 piercing plus 1 fire
Ranged [one-action] luminous spark +8 (fire, light, range 20 feet), Damage 1d4 fire
Primal Innate Spells DC 16; 1st color spray; Cantrips (1st) dancing
lights, daze, detect magic
Grig
Grigs are kindly musicians of the fey,
often getting themselves into trouble due
to their penchant for confronting evil well
beyond their ability to vanquish. Even so, they
fight bravely and with great cunning, using their
magic and ranged sonic attacks while flying
and leaping using their wings and powerful
cricket-like lower torsos to stay out of reach.
GRIG CREATURE 1
CN TINY FEY SPRITE
Perception +7; low-light vision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +2 (+6 to High Jump or Long Jump),
Performance +7, Stealth +7
Str –2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +4
AC 17; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +9
HP 20; Weaknesses cold iron 5
Speed 25 feet, fly 30 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +9 (agile, finesse, magical), Damage 1d4–2 bludgeoning
S-T
309

308
VARIANT PIXIE ARROWS
Pixies can enchant their
arrows with a wide variety of
effects, though nearly all such
enchantments are designed to
charm or bewilder, never maim.
Some arrows may emulate the
effects of spells such as confusion,
fear, hideous laughter, and
even suggestion.
Ranged [one-action] dissonant note +9 (evocation, magical, range 30 feet, sonic), Damage 1d8 sonic
Primal Innate Spells DC 18; 2nd glitterdust, invisibility (self only); 1st illusory disguise;
Cantrips (2nd) ghost sound
Fiddle [one-action] (auditory, emotion, enchantment, mental, primal) A grig can rub its legs
together to create a catchy fiddling tune that compels others within 30 feet to dance
about, with varying effects depending on a DC 18 Will save. A listener is temporarily
immune for 10 minutes on a success, but otherwise, if the grig continues to Fiddle
each round, the creature receives no additional saves.
Success No effect.
Failure Flat-footed and –10-foot status penalty to Speeds.
Critical Failure As failure, and also slowed 1.
Pixie
Insatiably curious, overly excitable, and just a bit puckish,
pixies are wanderers and tricksters who use their pixie
dust to create all sorts of whimsical situations, as well as
to defend themselves. Other creatures often have trouble
understanding a pixie’s rapid, rambling way of speaking.
PIXIE CREATURE 4
CN SMALL FEY SPRITE
Perception +12; low-light vision
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +13, Deception +11, Nature +10, Stealth +11
Str –1, Dex +5, Con +1, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items longbow (60 arrows), shortsword
AC 23; Fort +8, Ref +14, Will +12; +1 status to
all saves vs. magic
HP 40; Weaknesses cold iron 5
Speed 15 feet, fly 45 feet
Melee [one-action] shortsword +13 (agile, finesse, magical,
versatile S), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Ranged [one-action] longbow +13 (deadly 1d10, magical, range increment
100 feet, reload 0, volley 20 feet), Damage 1d8+4 piercing
Primal Innate Spells DC 21; 4th invisibility (at will; self
only); 3rd dispel magic; 2nd entangle, faerie fire; 1st illusory
disguise; Cantrips (2nd) dancing lights, detect magic,
ghost sound, shield
Sprinkle Pixie Dust [one-action] (manipulate) The pixie
sprinkles pixie dust onto one of its arrows.
If the pixie hits a creature with that
arrow before the pixie’s next
turn, the arrow inflicts one of
the following special effects instead of dealing damage.
Each effect depends on the target’s DC 21 Will save. On
a critical hit, the target treats its save result as one
degree worse.
• Charm (emotion, enchantment, incapacitation,
mental) The target suffers the effects of a charm spell, except it doesn’t gain a
bonus to its save if the only hostile act was the pixie firing its bow, and the pixie can
choose to direct the target’s adoration toward another creature rather than itself.
• Memory Loss (divination, mental) On a failed Will save, the target loses the last 5
minutes of its memory.
• Sleep (enchantment, incapacitation, mental, sleep) The target suffers the effects of
a 3rd-level sleep spell.
• Subdual (enchantment, mental, nonlethal) The target takes 4d6 mental damage,
depending on its basic Will save.
S-T
311

310
JINX EATERS
In the pirate-controlled archipelago
of the Shackles, tengus occupy a
unique social niche, since many
pirates believe that a tengu’s
presence on board a ship wards
off bad luck. Known as “jinx
eaters,” these tengu are treated as
mascots by their pirate crews. Jinx
eaters don’t mind this treatment,
however, since it allows them
to escape much of the drudgery
associated with working on a
ship. When a tengu is sailing with
pirates afraid of ill fortune, the
claim that “hunger leads to bad
luck” secures comfort and respect
for the jinx eater more effectively
than any bribe.
Tengu
Crow-like humanoids, tengus are a canny and clever people who can be found
across all of Golarion. Tengus are used to being minorities and facing suspicion
wherever they travel, so by necessity many possess a knack for languages as
well as for blades. They live on the fringes of society and tend to flock toward
less-than-legal occupations, earning them their reputation for being streetwise
and unscrupulous-a label that, in turn, perpetuates the tengus’ oppressive cycle
of discrimination and illegitimate work.
Although humanoid, tengus have very distinct, birdlike features, and many
would say that they resemble crows more than they do humans. They have
strong, thick beaks, as well as sharp talons at the ends of their arms and legs.
Most of a tengu’s body is covered in small feathers that range in color from dark
brown and midnight blue to glossy black, with lighter colors being rare but not
unheard of. Like many avian creatures, tengus have hollow bones, making them
much lighter than other humanoids of their size, although few tengus possess the
wings necessary to fly naturally. A tengu’s speech might be punctuated by quick
clucks or throaty cawing, and many tengus practice conversation diligently to rid
themselves of these involuntary ticks. Ruffling of the feathers and compulsive,
jerky movements of the neck are other trademark habits. Tengus reproduce by
laying eggs: the average tengu egg is about 11 inches in diameter and 16 inches
tall and takes 4 months to hatch.
Tengus are a people in diaspora and are almost always found within larger
kingdoms and communities of other races. Perhaps because they are more visually
distinctive than most other humanoid races, tengus tend to be distrusted and
persecuted more often than, for example, elves or dwarves. As a result, tengus
tend to gather in close-knit social groups composed of other outcasts and
people of uncommon ancestry. Few true tengu communities exist, and
those that do are often exiled to ghettos and other forgotten city
quarters. From an early age, tengus learn that the world is not a
friendly place and that they must look out for themselves.
TENGU SNEAK CREATURE 2
CN MEDIUM HUMANOID TENGU
Perception +6; low-light vision
Languages Common, Tengu, plus two others
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +6, Deception +7, Diplomacy +5, Society
+5, Stealth +8, Thievery +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +0, Cha +1
Items rapier, shortbow, studded leather armor
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +4
HP 27
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] rapier +10 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+2
piercing
Melee [one-action] beak +10 (finesse), Damage 1d4+2 piercing
Ranged [one-action] shortbow +10 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6 piercing
Go for the Eyes [reaction] (incapacitation) Trigger The tengu critically hits with
a beak Strike. Effect The tengu attempts to peck out its victim’s eyes. The
target must attempt a DC 17 Fortitude save.
Success Unaffected.
Failure Blinded for 1 round.
Critical Failure Blinded until healed to maximum HP.
Sneak Attack The tengu deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flatfooted creatures.
Surprise Attacker On the first round of combat, creatures that haven’t
acted yet are flat-footed to the tengu.
S-T
311

310
TEROTRICUS MYTHS
The Kellids of Sarkoris dealt with
their fair share of terotricuses
during the era of the Worldwound,
and these people developed
unique rituals to purify tainted
grounds with the help of ancestral
spirits and feathers acquired from
celestials. Far south of there, in
what is now known as the Sodden
Lands, wastelanders who learn of
the presence of a terotricus-or
“swampblight,” as they’re called
there-carry lanterns blessed by
angels in the hopes that these
lights will keep the terotricus
at bay.
Terotricus
The legendary terotricus is a massive slime-mold that hails from the Abyss.
Its collective consciousness encapsulates entire regions, spreading as far as its
ever-growing cloud of spores will take it. Once it has seeped onto the Material
Plane from the Abyssal realm, a terotricus’s agenda is to feed on all living
creatures, infecting them with its spores, and its presence can spell doom for
any in its way.
Terotricuses move by rapidly expanding and contracting their slimy “bodies,”
which are capable of burrowing through soil, gliding across water, and
scrabbling up steep slopes. These behemoths of rot don’t need to travel to see
their plans come to fruition, though; their spores easily latch onto demons and
other denizens of the Abyss, who in turn bring this blight to the Material Plane
when the fiends are summoned.
When a terotricus infects a creature with its spores, web-like fungal growths
start appearing on the victim’s skin until they cover the entire body, at which
point the victim’s mind is also subdued and bent to the terotricus’s will. The
terotricus’s favored victims include animals, elves, and fey, though it is happy to
infect any creature it can catch. Cults of Treerazer occasionally attempt to make
contact with a terotricus, but such acts almost always simply result in a new sect
of spore-blighted slaves.
TEROTRICUS CREATURE 19
RARE CE GARGANTUAN FUNGUS
Perception +31; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 120 feet
Languages Abyssal, Elven, Sylvan
Skills Athletics +37, Deception +32, Intimidation +35, Nature +31, Survival +31
Str +10, Dex +5, Con +9, Int –1, Wis +6, Cha +5
AC 42; Fort +34, Ref +28, Will +33; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 370, regeneration 25 (deactivated by cold); Immunities controlled,
disease, paralyzed, sleep; Weaknesses cold 15, cold iron 15, good
15, slashing 10; Resistances fire 15
Spore Cloud (aura, disease); 30 feet. A creature entering the
aura or starting its turn there is exposed to spore blight.
Speed 35 feet; burrow 25 feet, climb 25 feet, swim 35 feet
Melee [one-action] tentacle +37 (chaotic, evil, magical, reach 20
feet), Damage 4d10+16 bludgeoning plus 2d6 chaotic, 2d6 evil, and
Improved Grab or Improved Push 20 feet (40 feet on a critical hit)
Ranged [one-action] spores +37 (chaotic, evil, magical, range increment 80 feet), Damage 4d8+6
poison plus 2d6 chaotic, 2d6 evil, spore blight, and sticky spores
Infest Environs [two-actions] (healing, necromancy, primal); Frequency once per day. Requirement
The terotricus is in a swamp or forested area. Effect The terotricus drains nutrients
from nearby trees and undergrowth while simultaneously
infesting them with fungal growth. All non-magical plant
life (though not plant creatures) within a 60-foot
emanation withers and sprouts foul mold and slimy
mushrooms, removing any cover and concealment
provided by trees and undergrowth. The terotricus is
healed 200 Hit Points.
Spore Blight (disease) Plants and fungi are immune. Saving
Throw Fortitude DC 40; Stage 1 enfeebled 2 (1 day); Stage
2 enfeebled 4 and slowed 1 (1 day); Stage 3 controlled by
the terotricus (as dominate; 5d8 days); Stage 4 dead.
Sticky Spores A creature hit by a terotricus’s spores
must succeed at a DC 40 Reflex save or take a
–10-foot status penalty to all its Speeds for 1
minute. On a critical failure, the creature is
immobilized until it Escapes (DC 40).
S-T
313

312
TREERAZER’S CULTISTS
Treerazer is worshipped by cultists
throughout the Inner Sea region.
The majority of these deranged
maniacs can be found within or
near the expanse of the Tanglebriar,
consisting of fungus-corrupted fey,
debased elves, or other sinister
demon worshippers. Beyond
Tanglebriar, his cultists are rarer
and tend to be loners or leaders
of very small groups. Treerazer’s
religious symbol is a bleeding dead
tree that’s been split in half.
Edicts corrupt plant life with
evil or fungal influences, slay elves,
feast on rotten flesh or fungus
Anathema grant mercy to
elves, plant trees, encourage
natural plant growth
Follower Alignments NE, CE
DEVOTEE BENEFITS
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Nature
Favored Weapon battleaxe
Domains destruction,
nature, nightmares, tyranny
Cleric Spells 1st: grim
tendrils, 3rd: wall of thorns,
6th: tangling creepers
Treerazer
Treerazer, the self-styled Lord of the Blasted Tarn, is a powerful demon on the
cusp of ascending to the true power of one of the rulers of the Abyss itself-a
demon lord. For now, even as a nascent demon lord, Treerazer is a dangerous foe.
Treerazer rarely leaves his swampy realm of Tanglebriar-a large thicket of
tainted foliage and rotting detritus just south of Kyonin’s Fierani Forest-but can
be encountered anywhere within that toxic mire, often accompanied by a small
legion of demons, corrupted fey, and other deadly allies. Certain occult rituals
have the power to call him forth from Tanglebriar, granting him the opportunity
to directly work his evils beyond the realm to which he has been exiled. Some
believe that no eldritch force contains Treerazer and that, were he willing, he
could travel Golarion with impunity, spreading the twisted blessings of his touch
and the corruption of his presence, yet the Lord of the Blasted Tarn is as cunning
and canny as he is deadly, and prefers to work his evils on the world from the
safety of his nightmare realm.
TREERAZER CREATURE 25
UNIQUE CE HUGE AMPHIBIOUS DEMON FIEND
Perception +46; darkvision, true seeing
Languages Abyssal, Common, Elven, Sylvan, telepathy 300 ft.
Str +12, Dex +9, Con +11, Int +7, Wis +8, Cha +8
Skills Acrobatics +40, Arcana +38, Athletics +45, Intimidation +46, Nature +49,
Occultism +38, Religion +45, Stealth +40
Items Blackaxe (page 313)
AC 54; Fort +42, Ref +40, Will +43, +2 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 550, regeneration 50 (deactivated by good); Immunities death effects, disease,
mental, poison; Weaknesses good 20, Resistances acid 20, cold 15, fire 15, physical
20 (except cold iron)
Aura of Corruption (aura, plant, primal, transmutation) 120 feet. Plants near Treerazer
twist, deform, and transform into thorny or fungoid parodies of their natural shapes.
A living creature in this area must succeed at a DC 47 Fortitude save each round or
become partially transformed into plantlike matter. Those who fail this saving throw
are treated as if they were plants for the purposes of any effect that particularly
harms or inconveniences plant creatures more than other creatures, but do not gain
any benefits of being plant creatures. This effect lasts as long as the creature remains
within the area of corruption and for 1 minute thereafter.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 60 feet, fly 60 feet, swim 40 feet; freedom of movement
Melee[one-action]Blackaxe +47 (acid, chaotic, evil, magical, reach 15 feet, sweep; page 313), Damage
4d12+15 slashing plus 1d6 acid, 1d6 chaotic, and 1d6 evil, and 2d6 slashing vs. plants
Melee [one-action] jaws +45 (agile, chaotic, evil, magical, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d10+18 slashing
plus 2d6 chaotic and 2d6 evil
Primal Innate Spells DC 49, attack +43; 10th horrid wilting, time stop, wall of thorns; 9th
Abyssal wrath (at will), dispel magic (at will); 6th tangling creepers (at will); 5th Abyssal
plague (at will); 3rd earthbind (at will); 2nd telekinetic maneuver (at will); Constant
(8th) true seeing; (4th) freedom of movement; Cantrips (9th) telekinetic projectile
Primal Rituals DC 49; Abyssal pact, planar ally
Defoliation [two-actions] (primal, necromancy, plant) Treerazer exudes a pulse of sickly green light
in a 30-foot-radius emanation. All plants in the area (including creatures under the effect
of his aura of corruption) blacken and wither. Non-creature plants immediately wither
and die. Plant creatures take 20d8 negative damage with a DC 49 basic Fortitude save.
A creature that fails its save is doomed 1 for 1 minute and sickened 3. Treerazer can
choose to exclude any number of plants in the area from this effect, and generally does
so to preserve twisted and corrupted plants or fungi, or plant creatures that are allied to
his cause. Treerazer can’t use Defoliation for 1d4 rounds.
Dispelling Strike [free-action] (abjuration, primal); Frequency once per round; Trigger Treerazer hits
a creature, object, or spell effect with a weapon Strike or a defoliation attack. Effect
S-T
313

312
SPAWN OF CYTH-V’SUG
Treerazer was once the favored
minion and lieutenant (some
even say child) of the demon lord
Cyth-V’sug, Lord of Fungus and
Parasites. After a failed attempt to
wrest that role in the Abyss away
from Cyth-V’sug, Treerazer fled to
the Material Plane. Cyth-V’sug was
unable (or perhaps only unwilling)
to pursue but took steps to ensure
that Treerazer would remain
there by exiling him, severing
Treerazer’s bond to the Abyss-if
the Lord of the Blasted Tarn is
slain, his animus will not return to
the Abyss and reform. Death, to
Treerazer, is a permanent thing.
Treerazer casts his innate dispel magic, targeting the creature he hit with his Strike or
one spell affecting that creature.
Staggering Strike When Treerazer scores a critical hit with a melee attack, the target is
stunned 2.
Blackaxe
Treerazer’s favored and deadly weapon Blackaxe is a potent magical item known
as an artifact-a creation far beyond that of most mortals. Should Treerazer
be defeated and a PC take possession of Blackaxe, they claim the power of the
weapon. Such power comes with a price though, for Blackaxe’s influence will
drive any who claim it to perform vile deeds and, ultimately, may even compel its
user to restore a defeated Treerazer to power!
BLACKAXE ITEM 25
UNIQUE ARTIFACT CURSED EVOCATION PRIMAL
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
This potent weapon used by Treerazer is a +4 greater corrosive major striking obsidian
greataxe that grants a +4 item bonus to attack rolls, deals an extra 2d6 damage to
plants, and has the properties of adamantine.
Activate [one-action] (divination, scrying) Requirements You aren’t wielding Blackaxe and you
are its true owner. Effect You sense the world around Blackaxe as though you were in
its location and can use any of your innate spells
through the link as if it were the source of the
spell. If another creature is wielding Blackaxe,
it must succeed at a DC 50 Will save or
be slowed 2 until it relinquishes the
weapon.
Activate [free-action] command
(conjuration, teleportation)
Requirements You aren’t
wielding Blackaxe and you
are its true owner. Effect
Blackaxe appears in your hands,
teleporting instantly from its prior location.
Activate [one-action] command (death, healing,
necromancy) Frequency once per minute.
Effect Make a Strike against a living tree
with Blackaxe. If it hits, the tree withers
to ash and you heal 250 Hit Points and
gain the benefit of restoration (6th)
and restore senses.
S-T
315

314
TROLL BLOOD
The blood of trolls is a valuable
and difficult-to-procure substance
of intense interest to alchemists,
witches, and doctors the world
over. Though initially it is of little
interest other than its unnaturally
vibrant hue, when processed
correctly its applications are
numerous. Experiments have
produced oils that restore lost
limbs, potions that grant the
imbiber supernatural strength,
and even smoke bombs that cause
anyone caught in the haze to fly
into an unstoppable rage.
Troll
Slavering, cruel, practically invincible brutes: this is the villager’s stock description
for the dread monsters known as trolls. But words hardly do justice to trolls’
capacity for destruction. They are as bloodthirsty as orcs but lacking the discipline,
as massive as giants but capable of regenerating wounded flesh in an instant,
and as reprobate as ogres but with twice the strength. The only way to really
understand the wanton violence of a troll is to experience it firsthand-a fate few
would wish even upon their worst enemies.
The first thing that comes to mind when most think of trolls is the creatures’
power of bodily regeneration. So potent is this regeneration that the only way to
overcome it is to exploit the troll’s vulnerability to acid and fire. It is not enough
to slay the troll with caustic or flaming weapons, though-even the smallest
scrap of a troll’s flesh can regenerate into a full-size troll given enough time. The
only sure way to eradicate a troll menace is to burn the monster’s entire body
until nothing remains.
Trolls are solitary hunters, for their wickedness is anathema even to other
giants. They occasionally roam in small gangs of two to four, but only when
prey is plentiful or a particularly strong counterforce has broached their
hunting grounds. In rare instances, an old and powerful troll comes to lead
small tribes of trolls. Such “troll kings” possess enough cunning to lead
their hordes in devastating raids and massacres, and their presence
permanently alters the surrounding ecosystem.
A wide variety of trolls exist, from the terrible
monster traditionally associated with the name to the
water-dwelling scrag and hybrid flood troll. Regional
variations exist as well-mountain trolls among stony
peaks, for instance, or moss trolls in swampy bayous-
but all share the same trademark regenerative powers and
insatiable thirst for blood.
Troll
Common trolls are dim-witted, gangly giants who
stalk the fringes of civilization. They rely on their
incredible strength to overpower foes with their
vicious claws and toothy maws. A troll’s endless hunger
drives it to consume all variety of living creatures, and it
is their ravenous eating habits that fuel trolls’ legendary
regenerative abilities. Trolls stand anywhere from 12 to
16 feet tall, though they prefer to hunch for comfort and
to lull foes into a false sense of security.
TROLL CREATURE 5
CE LARGE GIANT TROLL
Perception +11; darkvision
Languages Jotun
Skills Athletics +12, Intimidation +12
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +6, Int –2, Wis +0, Cha –2
AC 20; Fort +17, Ref +11, Will +7
HP 115, regeneration 20 (deactivated by acid or fire); Weaknesses fire 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +14 (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d10+5 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +14 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+5 slashing
Rend [one-action] claw
Troll King
Some trolls have learned the skills necessary to survive 
S-T
315

314
TROLL AUGURS
Particularly devout trolls, called
augurs, claim to possess the
so‑called “gift of sight,” which
they believe was granted them
by the demon lord Urxehl. Augurs
practice a disturbing method of
future‑telling, in which a troll
slashes open its own abdomen and
pulls out its entrails to interpret the
prophecies in its quivering innards.
Other cultists prod and agitate their
gutted diviner to keep it conscious
throughout the gruesome ordeal.
well beyond the typical life expectancy for their kind and rally others to follow
their lead. These champions develop a number of talents that make them
worthy leaders and potent hunters-namely their abilities to willingly boost
the rate of their regeneration and to shake off the acid and fire that would
hinder it, not to mention a bestial roar that can send would-be predators
scurrying off. Troll kings possess a cunning far beyond their younger kin-
they know to keep their allies close, and their enemies even closer. If a troll
king so much as suspects that one of its followers is plotting to usurp it,
retribution is swift and fatal.
TROLL KING CREATURE 10
CE LARGE GIANT TROLL
Perception +19; darkvision
Languages Jotun
Skills Athletics +21, Intimidation +22, Survival +17
Str +7, Dex +3, Con +7, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +4
AC 28; Fort +23, Ref +17, Will +15
HP 220, regeneration 30 (deactivated by acid or fire); Weaknesses fire 10
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Vigorous Shake [reaction] Trigger The
troll king takes persistent
acid or fire damage. Effect
The troll king shakes itself to
remove persistent acid or fire
effects. The troll king immediately
attempts a DC 15 flat check
to end the persistent damage
that triggered this reaction. If
the troll king succeeds at this
check, it can immediately use
Primordial Roar as part of
this reaction.
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +23 (reach 10 feet), Damage
2d12+13 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +23 (agile, reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d8+13 slashing
Rend [one-action] claw
Forced Regeneration [one-action] (concentrate) Requirements
The troll king’s regeneration is not currently
deactivated. Effect The troll king
regains 15 HP.
Primordial Roar [one-action] (auditory, emotion,
fear, mental) The troll king unleashes
a bestial roar. Each non-troll creature
within 100 feet must attempt a DC
29 Will save. The creature is then
temporarily immune for 10 minutes.
Critical Success The creature is
unaffected.
Success The creature is frightened 1.
Failure The creature is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The creature is frightened 3.
Unstoppable Charge [three-actions] The troll king Strides twice in a straight line. It
can make up to two claw Strikes during this movement and one
jaws Strike at the end of its movement. It can’t Strike the same
creature more than once.
U-Z
317

316
ALICORN
In alchemical and occult circles,
“alicorn” is the word for the
material that makes up a unicorn’s
horn, also used to describe any
object made from that horn. Note
that in many markets, alicorn sales
are illegal, and those who attempt
to sell alicorn are viewed with
repugnance-or worse.
Unicorn
Symbols of grace and purity, unicorns resemble proud and noble horses. They
are typically pure white of coat, but they are best known for the single, delicate
horn that extends from the center of their forehead. While unicorns often serve
as protectors of unspoiled wilderness and sacred places, they are themselves
highly sought after for their horns, which are said to possess potent magical
properties. To many, the mere idea of hunting such a magnificent creature in the
hopes of severing its horn is utterly reprehensible. Indeed, a de-horned unicorn
is a sorry sight, and few such unicorns survive much longer in the wild.
Unicorns are found almost exclusively in remote, unsullied areas of wilderness.
Sometimes associated with good-aligned deities, other times associated with nature
and the fey, unicorns are always known for their righteousness and nobility. They
are wary, at best, of most humanoid creatures, due in large part for poachers’
tendency to hunt them for their horns, but unicorns are often rumored to have
a weakness for those who are pure of both heart and spirit. Despite some tales,
unicorns are equally likely to recognize purity in young men as in young women.
UNICORN CREATURE 3
CG LARGE BEAST FEY
Perception +13; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Sylvan
Skills Acrobatics +10, Diplomacy +11, Stealth +8, Survival +9
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +4
Wild Empathy The unicorn has a connection to the creatures of the natural world that
allows it to communicate with them. The unicorn can use Diplomacy to Make an
Impression on animals and to make very simple Requests of them.
AC 20; Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +11 (+2 vs. mental)
HP 45; Immunities poison
Speed 45 feet
Melee [one-action]horn +12 (good, magical), Damage 1d10+4 piercing plus 1d6 good and ghost touch
Melee [one-action] hoof +12 (agile, magical), Damage 1d8+4 bludgeoning and ghost touch
Primal Innate Spells DC 21; 5th tree stride; 3rd heal (×2), neutralize
poison; 1st detect alignment (at will, good only); Cantrips (2nd)
light
Ghost Touch A unicorn’s Strikes have the effects of a
ghost touch property rune.
Powerful Charge [two-actions]The unicorn Strides up to
double its Speed in a straight line and then
makes a horn Strike. If the unicorn moved
at least 20 feet, it deals an additional
2d6 damage on a hit.
U-Z
317

316
OUTCASTS OF AIR
Uthuls are thought to be an
outcast group of beings that once
dwelled on the Plane of Air. It is
unclear whether their fury was
the reason for their expulsion
from that plane or if they grew
implacable after being banished.
Uthuls do not speak of their
history to anyone and simply
redouble their unending rage on
any who dare to ask.
Uthul
An uthul most often appears to be a dark, swirling cloud filled with flying debris
and streaked with sudden flashes of lightning. Although they are clearly elemental
in nature, uthuls are nearly always found on the Material Plane, where they hide
among natural cloud formations, especially thunderstorms.
UTHUL CREATURE 14
CE HUGE AIR ELEMENTAL
Perception +20; darkvision
Languages Auran
Skills Acrobatics +29, Athletics +27, Intimidation +23, Stealth +25
Str +7, Dex +7, Con +4, Int –1, Wis –2, Cha +3
AC 36; Fort +28, Ref +29, Will +22
HP 250; Immunities electricity, paralyze, poison, sleep
High Winds (air, aura) 40 feet. Air in the aura is difficult
terrain for Flying creatures without the air trait.
Speed fly 100 feet; swiftness
Melee [one-action] claw +29 (agile), Damage 3d12+11 slashing
Ranged [one-action] debris +29 (range increment 60 feet),
Damage 5d8+15 bludgeoning
Lightning Crash [one-action] (electricity, incapacitation,
sonic) The uthul unleashes a powerful bolt
of lightning and a stunning thunderclap.
The bolt deals 6d12 electricity damage
to all creatures in a 30-foot line, with
a DC 34 basic Reflex save, and every
creature in a 20-foot emanation must
attempt a DC 34 Fortitude save. The uthul
can’t use Lightning Crash again for 1d4
rounds.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is stunned 1.
Failure The creature is stunned for 1 round.
Critical Failure The creature is stunned for 1d4 rounds.
Swiftness An uthul’s movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
Whirlwind Form [two-actions] (concentrate) The uthul transforms itself into a swirling
vortex of storm and fury 10 feet wide and up to 40 feet tall. It stays
in this form for 3 rounds or until it Dismisses the effect. While in
this form, the uthul gains resistance 10 to physical damage and can
move through other creatures. Its aura remains active, but it can’t
make debris Strikes nor use Lightning Crash. Instead, any creature
the uthul moves through takes 4d6 bludgeoning damage and
2d12 electricity damage. A creature can take this damage
only once per round. A Large or smaller creature
must also succeed at a DC 32 Reflex save or be
picked up and held suspended within the vortex.
Suspended creatures move with the uthul. A
creature can attempt to escape by spending an
action to attempt a DC 32 Reflex save (or a DC 32
Acrobatics check to maneuver in flight if it has a
fly Speed). Upon escaping, or when the uthul
transforms back into its storm cloud form, a
suspended creature is hurled 1d4 × 10 feet in
a random direction, then falls unless it can fly
or otherwise remain aloft. After returning to
its normal form, the uthul must wait 1 minute
before it can use Whirlwind Form again.
U-Z
319

318
BUILDING VAMPIRES
Because vampires can inflict their
nature upon any creature whose
blood they drink, practically any
living monster can become one
of these undead horrors. When
you need to create a vampire for
your game, you can do so in two
ways. In most cases, it’s more
effective to build the vampire
from the ground up, using the
standard rules for monster
creation (this is how the vampire
count, vampire spawn, and
vampire mastermind presented
on these pages were built). Or you
can use the guidelines presented
under Creating a Vampire to turn
an existing creature (or even a
player character!) into a vampire,
adjusting the monster as you see
fit. In either case, specific vampire
abilities like coffin restoration,
Mist Escape, and Drink Blood work
the same.
Vampire
Vampires are undead creatures that feed on the blood of the living.
Creating a Vampire
You can turn an existing living creature into a vampire using the following steps.
Increase the creature’s level by 1 and change its statistics as follows.
• It gains the undead and vampire traits, and usually becomes evil.
• Increase AC, attack bonuses, DCs, saving throws, and skill modifiers by 1.
• Increase damage with Strikes and other offensive abilities by 1. If an ability
can be used only a small number of times (such as a dragon’s breath weapon),
increase the damage by 2 instead.
• Reduce HP by the amount listed on the table.
• The vampire gains fast healing and resistance to physical damage (except
silver) as indicated in the table. These abilities are the reason the vampire
has less HP.
Starting Level HP Decrease Fast Healing/Resistance
3–4 –20 5
5–7 –30 7
8–14 –40 10
15+ –60 15
Basic Vampire Abilities
All vampires gain the following abilities. If the base creature has any abilities that
specifically come from it being a living creature, it loses them. It also loses any
traits that represented its life as a living creature, such as human and humanoid.
You might also need to adjust abilities that conflict with the vampire’s theme.
Negative Healing
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyze, poison, sleep
Coffin Restoration (divine, necromancy, negative) Unlike other undead, a vampire isn’t
destroyed at 0 HP. Instead, it falls unconscious. If its body rests in its coffin for 1 hour,
the vampire gains 1 HP, after which its fast healing begins to function normally.
Vampire Weaknesses All vampires possess the following weaknesses.
• Compulsions Vampires are creatures of strange and unknowable compulsions. A
typical vampire can’t voluntarily cross running water unless it is transported while it
hides within its coffin, nor can it enter a private dwelling unless invited in by someone
with the authority to do so. At your discretion, vampires might have different
compulsions-a pirate vampire might not be able to set foot on solid ground without
being invited, for example. The vampire can still be forced to do these things and
might be able to overcome its compulsion just as it does its revulsion (see below).
• Revulsion A vampire can’t voluntarily come within 10 feet of brandished garlic or a
brandished religious symbol of a non-evil deity. To brandish garlic or a religious symbol,
a creature must Interact to do so for 1 round (similar to Raising a Shield). If the vampire
involuntarily comes within 10 feet of an object of its revulsion, it gains the fleeing
condition, running from the object of its revulsion until it ends an action beyond 10 feet.
After 1 round of being exposed to the subject of its revulsion, a vampire can attempt
a DC 25 Will save as a single action, which has the concentrate trait. On a success, it
overcomes its revulsions for 1d6 rounds (or 1 hour on a critical success).
• Stake A wooden stake driven through a vampire’s heart drops the vampire to 0
HP and prevents it from healing above 0 HP, even in its coffin. Staking a vampire
requires three actions and works only if the vampire is unconscious. If the stake is
removed, the vampire can heal above 0 HP again, and if it’s in its coffin the 1-hour
rest period begins once the stake is removed. If the vampire’s head is severed and
anointed with holy water while the stake is in place, the vampire is destroyed.
• Sunlight If exposed to direct sunlight, a vampire immediately becomes slowed 1. The
slowed value increases by 1 each time the vampire ends its turn in sunlight. If the 
U-Z
319

318
VAMPIRES AND DHAMPIR
The most common and traditional
vampires, as presented here, are
known also as the “moroi.” They
are prevalent in Golarion in the
mist-shrouded counties of Ustalav
and found in small numbers in
almost every nation of the Inner
Sea. Other types of vampires
include the withered nosferatu,
the hopping jiang shi, and the
psychic vetala-these vampires
share many of the basic traits
with moroi but possess new
abilities of their own. Dhampir
(page 95) can be born of any
of these vampire races, though
moroi-born dhampir known as
svetochers are the most common,
especially in the Inner Sea region.
vampire loses all its actions in this way, it is destroyed. Due to their supernatural
aversion to light, vampires don’t cast shadows or show a reflection in mirrors.
Climb Speed Vampires gain a climb Speed equal to their land Speed.
Claws If the creature had hands, its fingernails thicken and grow, granting it an unarmed
claw Strike that deals slashing damage and has the agile trait. If the monster had
any agile attacks, the damage dealt by its claws should be roughly the same as the
damage dealt by those attacks. If it had only non-agile attacks, its claws should deal
three-quarters that damage.
Drink Blood [one-action] (divine, necromancy); Requirement A grabbed, paralyzed, restrained,
unconscious, or willing creature is within the vampire’s reach. Effect The vampire sinks
its fangs into that creature to drink its blood. This requires an Athletics check against
the victim’s Fortitude DC if the victim is grabbed and is automatic for any of the other
conditions. The victim is drained 1 and the vampire regains HP equal to 10% of its
maximum HP, gaining any excess HP as temporary Hit Points. Drinking Blood from a
creature that’s already drained doesn’t restore any HP to the vampire but increases
the victim’s drain value by 1. A vampire can also consume blood that’s been emptied
into a vessel for sustenance, but it gains no HP from doing so.
A victim’s drained condition decreases by 1 per week. A blood transfusion,
which requires a DC 20 Medicine check and sufficient blood or a blood donor,
reduces the drain by 1 after 10 minutes.
Grab The creature’s claw attacks (or equivalent unarmed attacks) gain Grab.
True Vampire Abilities
Powerful vampires that can create and control vampires from their victims gain
additional vampire abilities, as detailed below. A creature below level 5 is not a
significant enough creature to become a true vampire-you should instead simply
make such a creature into a regular vampire spawn, or rebuild the creature so that
it’s at least level 5 before becoming a true vampire.
Resistances The vampire resists all physical damage except magical silver.
Create Spawn (divine, downtime, necromancy) If a creature dies after being reduced
to 0 HP by Drink Blood, the vampire can turn this victim into a vampire by donating
some of its own blood to the victim and burying the victim in earth for 3 nights. If
the new vampire is lower level than its creator, it is under the creator’s control. If a
vampire controls too many spawn at once (as determined by the GM), strong-willed
spawn can free themselves by succeeding at a Will saving throw against the
vampire’s Will DC.
Mist Escape [free-action] Trigger The vampire is reduced to 0 HP. Effect The vampire uses Turn to
Mist (page 320). It can take move actions to move toward its coffin even though it’s
at 0 HP. While at 0 HP in this form, the vampire is unaffected by further damage. It
automatically returns to its corporeal form, unconscious, if it reaches its coffin or after
2 hours, whichever comes first.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation) The vampire
transforms into one of its animal forms or back into its normal form. Most vampires
can turn into a bat, but some can turn into a different creature, such as a rat or a wolf.
Use the options in the aerial form and animal form spells as guidelines.
• Bat The vampire changes into a bat swarm or giant bat (page 39). It gains
echolocation 40 feet, a land Speed of 20 feet and a fly Speed of 30 feet, and a fangs
Strike with the same attack bonus as its highest melee attack. These fangs deal the
same amount of damage as the vampire’s claws, but deal piercing damage rather
than slashing damage.
Children of the Night (divine, enchantment, mental) The vampire’s presence brings
forth creatures of the night to do the master’s bidding. These typically include rat
swarms, bat swarms, and wolves, but can include other creatures. The vampire can
give telepathic orders to these creatures as long as they are within 100 feet, but they
can’t communicate back.
Dominate [two-actions] (divine, enchantment, incapacitation, mental, visual) The vampire
can cast dominate at will as a divine innate spell. Casting it requires staring into 
U-Z
321

320
SPAWN LOCATIONS
Vampire spawn live wherever their
masters demand. When free of any
master, they tend to roam in packs
through slums or other urban
areas that wouldn’t notice a few
people going missing.
the target’s eyes, giving the spell the visual trait. The save DC uses the DC of the
vampire’s level (Core Rulebook 503), and a creature that succeeds is temporarily
immune to that vampire’s Dominate for 24 hours. Fully destroying the vampire ends
the domination, but merely reducing the vampire to 0 HP is insufficient to break
the spell.
Drink Blood As a typical vampire, but the victim is drained 2 instead of 1.
Turn to Mist [one-action] (concentrate, divine, transmutation) The vampire turns into a cloud of
vapor, as the gaseous form spell, or back to its normal form. The vampire loses fast
healing while in gaseous form. The vampire can remain in this form indefinitely.
Vampire Spawn
Vampires use their spawn for infiltration and reconnaissance.
VAMPIRE SPAWN ROGUE CREATURE 4
CE MEDIUM UNDEAD VAMPIRE
Perception +12; darkvision
Languages Common, plus one regional language
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +9, Intimidation +8, Society +5, Stealth +12
Str +3, Dex +5, Con +1, Int –1, Wis +3, Cha +2
AC 22; Fort +9, Ref +13, Will +11
HP 40, coffin restoration, fast healing 5, negative healing; Immunities death effects,
disease, paralyze, poison, sleep; Weaknesses vampire weaknesses; Resistances
physical 5 (except silver)
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +14 (agile), Damage 1d8+6 slashing plus Grab
Drink Blood [one-action] (divine, necromancy) When Drinking Blood, the spawn regains 5 HP.
Sneak Attack The vampire spawn deals 1d6 extra precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
Vampire Count
Vampire counts rule their demesnes through a mix of fear and cruelty.
VAMPIRE COUNT CREATURE 6
CE MEDIUM UNDEAD VAMPIRE
Perception +17; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril, plus one regional language
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +15, Deception +14, Diplomacy +14, Intimidation +16,
Society +14, Stealth +13
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +4
Items leather armor, +1 rapier
Children of the Night (divine, enchantment, mental)
AC 24; Fort +11, Ref +14, Will +17
HP 65, coffin restoration, fast healing 7, negative healing; Immunities
death effects, disease, paralyze, poison, sleep; Weaknesses vampire
weaknesses; Resistances physical 7 (except magical silver)
Mist Escape [free-action]
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] rapier +17 (deadly 1d8, disarm +1), Damage 1d6+11 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +17 (agile), Damage 1d8+8 slashing plus Grab
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph, transmutation)
Giant bat with fangs +15 for 1d8+9 piercing.
Create Spawn (divine, downtime, necromancy)
Dominate [two-actions] (divine, enchantment, incapacitation,
mental, visual) DC 22
Drink Blood [one-action] (divine, necromancy) When Drinking
Blood, the vampire regains 10 HP.
Turn to Mist [one-action] (concentrate, divine, transmutation) 
U-Z
321

320
NON-EVIL VAMPIRES
Non-evil vampires are rare and
at odds with their basic nature.
Such vampires typically give up a
fraction of their power in exchange
for some of their lost humanity.
Vampire Mastermind
Vampire masterminds are evil wizards who control entire cabals of the undead
and instill fear in the hearts of mortals far and wide.
VAMPIRE MASTERMIND CREATURE 9
UNCOMMON CE MEDIUM UNDEAD VAMPIRE
Perception +20; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril, plus one regional language
Skills Acrobatics +17, Arcana +21, Athletics +16, Deception +20,
Diplomacy +20, Intimidation +22, Society +19,
Stealth +19
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +6, Wis +4, Cha +5
Items signet ring
Children of the Night (divine, enchantment, mental)
AC 27; Fort +15, Ref +18, Will +20
HP 115, coffin restoration, fast healing 10, negative
healing; Immunities death effects, disease,
paralyze, poison, sleep; Weaknesses vampire
weaknesses; Resistances physical 10 (except
magical silver)
Mist Escape [free-action]
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +18 (agile), Damage 2d8+9
slashing plus Grab
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 29, attack +19;
4th fire shield, phantasmal killer, veil, wall
of fire; 3rd dispel magic, fireball, haste,
lightning bolt; 2nd flaming sphere, invisibility,
mirror image, touch of idiocy; 1st color spray
(×2), fleet step, ray of enfeeblement; Cantrips
(4th) detect magic, mage hand, message, ray of
frost, sigil
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, divine, polymorph,
transmutation) Giant bat with fangs +19 for
2d8+9 piercing.
Create Spawn (divine, downtime, necromancy)
Dominate [two-actions] (divine, enchantment,
incapacitation, mental, visual) DC 26
Drain Bonded Item [one-action[free-action] (arcane, wizard);
Frequency Once per day. Requirements
The vampire hasn’t acted yet on this
turn. Effect The vampire expends the
power stored in its signet ring. This gives
the vampire the ability to cast one prepared
spell it had already previously cast today,
without spending a spell slot. The vampire
must still Cast the Spell and meet the spell’s
other requirements.
Drink Blood [one-action] (divine, necromancy) When
Drinking Blood, the vampire regains 10 HP.
Steady Spellcasting If another creature’s reaction
would disrupt the vampire mastermind’s
spellcasting action, the vampire attempts a
DC 15 flat check. If the vampire succeeds, its
action isn’t disrupted.
Turn to Mist [one-action] (concentrate, divine,
transmutation) 
U-Z
323

322
WARG LEGENDS
Wargs are the subject of many
grim tales and campfire stories.
Frightening accounts of wargs
gobbling up children whole have a
disturbing basis in fact, for these
ravenous creatures have jaws that
can unhinge like those of a serpent
to gulp down small prey while the
victim yet lives.
Warg
The warg is an intelligent and malevolent wolf that dwells among goblins,
hobgoblins, orcs, and other violent humanoids.
Warg
Wargs hunt in packs and surround their prey like common wolves, but their
cunning and penchant for taunting victims makes them easy to distinguish from
their less-intelligent cousins. But despite their intelligence, wargs have simple
desires for food and shelter, making them easy for evil humanoids such as orcs
and hobgoblins to recruit to protect their camps or join them in battle. Most
wargs are amenable to this arrangement, but if food should run out, wargs are
more than willing to integrate goblinoid flesh into their diet.
WARG CREATURE 2
NE MEDIUM BEAST
Perception +8; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Goblin, Orcish
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +8, Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Stealth +7, Survival +8
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +2
AC 17; Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 36
Avenging Bite [reaction] Trigger A creature within reach of the warg’s jaws attacks one of the
warg’s allies. Effect The warg makes a jaws Strike against the triggering creature.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d8+4 piercing plus Grab
Pack Attack The warg’s Strikes deal 1d4 extra damage to creatures within
the reach of at least two of the warg’s allies.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack); Small, 1d6+2 bludgeoning, Rupture 9
Winter Wolf
Winter wolves are related to wargs, but are larger, smarter, and far
more dangerous. They are capable of exhaling plumes of freezing
breath and are big enough to easily serve as mounts for orcs and
hobgoblins-provided the winter wolf is willing, of course. Like
wargs, winter wolves hunt in packs, but unlike their smaller cousins,
they have a notable proud streak. When they deign to serve others, they
reserve this privilege for larger and more dangerous creatures such as
frost giants, renegade yetis, or even white dragons.
WINTER WOLF CREATURE 5
NE LARGE BEAST
Perception +14; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common, Jotun
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +13, Deception +11, Intimidation +11, Stealth +13 (+16 in
snow), Survival +12
Str +6, Dex +4, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +2
AC 23; Fort +13, Ref +15, Will +10
HP 70; Immunities cold; Weaknesses fire 5
Buck [reaction] DC 21
Avenging Bite [reaction] As warg.
Speed 40 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +15 (cold), Damage 1d10+6 piercing plus 1d6 cold and Knockdown
Breath Weapon[two-actions] (cold, evocation, primal); The winter wolf breathes a cloud of frost in
a 15-foot cone that deals 5d8 cold damage (DC 23 basic Reflex save). The winter wolf
can’t use Breath Weapon again for 1d4 rounds.
Pack Attack The winter wolf’s Strikes deal 1d6 extra damage to creatures within the
reach of at least two of the winter wolf’s allies.
U-Z
323

322
ALTERNATE WARSWORNS
While uniquely terrible, war is not
the only tragedy that can lead to
mass deaths. Other forms of mass
undead, similar to warsworn, can
sometimes arise from causes such
as famine or disaster. Flamesworn
rise from large crowds killed by
fire, while plagueborn rise when
entire townships or even cities
perish to disease.
Warsworn
A warsworn is an animate mass of corpses composed of dozens, sometimes
even hundreds, of victims of battle. They are formed by deities of undeath or
war or, rarely, spontaneously manifest from the devastation of an especially
horrendous battle.
WARSWORN CREATURE 16
UNCOMMON NE GARGANTUAN UNDEAD
Perception +27; darkvision
Languages Common (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +33
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +7, Int –1, Wis +5, Cha +5
AC 37; Fort +29, Ref +25, Will +27; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 350, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyze, poison, unconscious
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) 100 feet, DC 35
Speed 30 feet
Melee [one-action] corpse wave +32 (magical), Damage 4d12+9 bludgeoning
plus energy drain
Melee [one-action] animated weapon +30 (agile, magical, reach 100 feet,
versatile B, versatile P), Damage four of the weapon’s damage
dice +9 of the weapon’s damage type
Ranged [one-action] scrap ball +28 (magical, range increment
100 feet), Damage 4d12+9 bludgeoning plus plummet
Absorb [free-action] (death, divine, necromancy); Trigger The
warsworn moves into a dying creature’s space.
Effect The warsworn absorbs the dying creature
into itself, instantly killing the creature and
healing the warsworn for a number of Hit Points
equal to the creature’s level. As long as the
warsworn still exists, absorbed creatures
can’t be resurrected except by wish or a
similarly powerful effect.
Animated Weapons (divine, evocation); The warsworn
assumes control of unattended weapons within
100 feet, forcing them to levitate around it. The
warsworn can telekinetically wield these weapons to
make melee Strikes with a reach of 100 feet.
Energy Drain (divine, necromancy); When a warsworn hits with a corpse wave Strike
or damages a creature with Trample, the target must succeed at a DC 35 Fortitude save
or become drained 2 and doomed 1. On a critical
success, the target becomes temporarily
immune to the warsworn’s energy drain for
24 hours.
Plummet A creature hit by a warsworn’s scrap ball
Strike must attempt a DC 37 Reflex save. On a
failure, the target falls prone;
if the target was airborne,
it falls up to 120 feet, taking
damage from the fall and
landing prone if the descent
brings it to the ground. On a
critical failure, the target is
also held under a pile of scrap
(DC 37 to Escape).
Trample [three-actions]Huge or smaller, corpse
wave, DC 37
U-Z
325

324
SACRED STINGERS
Wasps are upheld as sacred
among the priesthood of the
elven deity Calistria, goddess
of vengeance. Some priests of
Calistria summon giant wasps or
wasp swarms as servitors, while a
few nurture giant wasps as pets,
temple guardians, or companions.
Followers of Calistria, both
clergy and laypeople alike, seek
to emulate the wasp’s penchant
for leaving stung victims alive to
suffer over a long period: a fitting
model for revenge.
PARALYTIC POISON
The poison of the giant wasp
loses its potency soon after being
harvested, but alchemists have
learned of a way to preserve
some of its properties by adding
a number of harsh additives; this
method makes it even deadlier.
Wasp
While the common wasp poses little threat to a hardy adventurer aside from
an uncomfortable sting, a large and aggressive swarm of these territorial
insects-to say nothing of their oversized kin-can lay low an entire party
of heroes. The wasps represented here are of the common variety also known
as yellowjackets, but many other sorts of dangerous wasps exist, such as a
Garundi variant that swarms in such great numbers that it can decimate entire
villages, and the dreaded extraplanar hellwasps, which build their nests within
the corpses of their victims.
Giant Wasp
Giant wasps are much more dangerous but less common than their smaller kin,
and-to the relief of those who encounter them-they tend to be solitary.
GIANT WASP CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +11, Athletics +9
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +6
HP 45
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] stinger +12 (poison), Damage 1d12+4 piercing plus giant wasp venom
Implant Eggs [one-action] The giant wasp lays eggs in an adjacent creature that is paralyzed or
unconscious, exposing it to the wasp larva disease.
Giant Wasp Venom (incapacitation, poison) Saving Throw Fortitude DC 19; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 no effect (1 round); Stage 2 clumsy 2 (1 round); Stage 3
paralyzed (1 round)
Wasp Larva (disease) Saving Throw Fortitude DC 21; Stage 1 carrier with no ill effect
(1d6 days); Stage 2 drained 1 (1d3 days);
Stage 3 5d6 damage, larva emerges
(disease ends)
Wasp Swarm
Wasp nests are made of chewed wood fibers foraged from
the surrounding flora, which the wasps make into a material
similar to paper. A single wasp nest can house thousands
of individuals that emerge as a massive swarm. Most
swarms attack only to protect their nest or if otherwise
agitated, though druids and other primal enchanters
can bend these venomous vermin to their will-to deadly effect.
WASP SWARM CREATURE 4
N LARGE ANIMAL SWARM
Perception +10; darkvision
Skills Acrobatics +12
Str –4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +2, Cha –1
AC 18; Fort +10, Ref +12, Will +8
HP 45; Immunities precision, swarm mind; Weaknesses area
damage 5, splash damage 5; Resistances bludgeoning 7,
piercing 7, slashing 3
Speed 20 feet, fly 40 feet
Swarming Stings [one-action] Each enemy in the swarm’s space takes 2d8
piercing damage (DC 21 basic Reflex save) and is exposed to wasp venom. A successful
save negates the poison exposure.
Wasp Venom (poison) Saving Throw Fortitude DC 21; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d6 poison (1 round); Stage 2 2d6 poison and clumsy 2 (2 rounds)
U-Z
325

324
WEB LURKER LAIRS
Whether alone or in a group, web
lurkers hunt in forests, swamps,
or scrubby hill lands, constructing
structures from their webs high
up in trees or within craggy, high
canyons, and they surround their
territory with traps and snares
constructed of the same webbing
and natural material.
Web Lurker
Web lurkers, known also as ettercaps, are ugly monsters that not only dwell within
the lairs of spiders and swarms, but actively cultivate and shepherd such vermin.
WEB LURKER CREATURE 3
NE MEDIUM ABERRATION
Perception +10; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 30 feet (creatures touching its web)
Languages Aklo; spider speak
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +9, Crafting +8 (+12 to craft traps and snares), Stealth +11
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +1 Wis +3, Cha –1
Spider Speak The web lurker can speak with spiders, with the same effects and
limitations as speak with animals.
AC 19; Fort +10, Ref +11, Will +8
HP 45
Spring upon Prey [reaction] Trigger A creature touches the web lurker’s web while the web
lurker is on it. Requirement Initiative has not yet been rolled. Effect The web lurker
automatically notices the creature and Strides or Climbs before rolling initiative.
Speed 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fangs +11 (poison), Damage 1d8+6 piercing plus web lurker venom
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile), Damage 1d8+6 slashing
Melee [one-action] web +11, Effect web trap
Web Lurker Venom (poison) Saving Throw Fortitude DC 19; Maximum Duration
10 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 2 1d6 poison, flatfooted, and slowed 1 (1 round)
Web Trap A creature hit by the web lurker’s web attack is immobilized and stuck to the
nearest surface until it succeeds at DC 20 Acrobatics check to Escape.
Web Lurker Traps
The following traps are some used by web lurkers.
WEB LURKER DEADFALL HAZARD 3
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 23
Description A web tripwire lets loose a bundle of boulders
that fall on all targets within a 10-foot square.
Disable Survival (trained) or Thievery (expert) DC 20 to
rearrange the webbing
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +9
Deadfall [reaction] Trigger A creature steps into the square with
the web tripwire. Effect All creatures in the trap’s 10-foot
square take 2d6 bludgeoning damage (DC 20 basic Reflex
save).
WEB LURKER NOOSE HAZARD 2
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 22
Description Discreet webbing at throat level snags a creature that
walks into it.
Disable Survival (trained) or Thievery (expert) DC 18 to rearrange the
webbing
AC 18; Fort +11, Ref +5
Web Noose [reaction] (attack); Trigger A creature steps into the square with the
web tripwire. Effect The web lurker noose makes a noose Strike against the
triggering creature.
Melee noose +13 (deadly d10), Damage 3d6 bludgeoning and the target is grabbed
and pulled off the ground (Escape DC 22). The target takes 1d6 bludgeoning damage
at the end of each of its turns as long as it’s caught in the noose.
U-Z
327

326
WEMMUTH TREASURE
Wemmuths have little interest
in using magical items or
accumulating treasure out of a
sense of greed, but are smart
enough to understand that a few
well-placed trinkets and baubles
work amazingly well as lures.
Wemmuth
Fertilized by large quantities of spilled blood, such as that found on bloodstained
battlefields or in the war-torn regions surrounding besieged cities, wemmuths
are vile swaths of vines that draw sustenance from mortal suffering, lapping up
blood like water. Possessing a rudimentary intelligence and an unquenchable
thirst for blood, wemmuths lie in wait for most of their lives, growing to
incredible size in the bloody soil of their grisly homes. Though the vines that
comprise a wemmuth’s body are scarcely thicker than rope, a single adult
wemmuth system consists of 6 tons of vines, enough to stretch for 6,000 feet
if stretched from end to end in a single straight line. Wemmuths never orient
themselves this way, however, instead preferring to wrap themselves into
massive mounds approximately 15 feet across and equally thick. Although
wemmuths are often spotted lazing about, the scent of blood is enough to whip
one into a violent frenzy. The creature condenses its entire mass into a sphere
of sharp thorns and lashing vines, resembling a hateful tumbleweed the size of
an elephant. Wemmuths commonly dig up massive boulders or entire trees from
the ground and incorporate them into their rolling mass, using these objects to
bolster their defense against many forms of attack or hurling them at faraway
foes with terrifying precision.
Some speculate that wemmuths are a form of diabolical corruption let
loose upon Golarion by House Thrune of Cheliax, perhaps as a
scorched earth tactic against their rivals. Influential nobles from
Nirmathas and Molthune both point fingers at one another for
the wemmuth’s creation, Nirmathas citing Molthune’s
close ties to Infernal Cheliax and Molthune blaming
the primal magic commonly employed by
Nirmathas’s many druids and rangers. Several
Varisian tales describe creatures closely matching
the wemmuth’s description attempting to
apprehend a famous folk trickster, while crusaders
from Mendev adhere to the belief that the wemmuths
were a blight unleashed upon Golarion by Deskari,
former demon lord of locusts, before his defeat at the
hands of mortal heroes.
WEMMUTH CREATURE 15
NE HUGE PLANT
Perception +25; darkvision, tremorsense (imprecise) 60 feet
Languages Aklo, Sylvan (can’t speak any language)
Skills Athletics +30, Deception +28, Stealth +30, Survival +27
Str +8, Dex +6, Con +6, Int –2, Wis +4, Cha +2
AC 37; Fort +27, Ref +27, Will +24
HP 335, blood leech; Weaknesses cold 20, slashing 15
Speed 25 feet, burrow 25 feet, climb 25 feet
Melee [one-action] pummel +29 (fatal d12, reach 15 feet, sweep), Damage
4d12+10 bludgeoning plus Improved Grab
Ranged [one-action] boulder +27 (fatal d12, range increment 60 feet), Damage
4d10+10 bludgeoning
Blood Leech [reaction] Trigger The wemmuth deals damage to a creature with
Constrict. Effect The wemmuth heals a number of Hit Points equal to
half the total damage dealt by Constrict.
Constrict [one-action] 2d12+10, DC 37
Engulf [two-actions] DC 37, 4d8 bludgeoning, Escape DC 35, Rupture 36
Thorny Mass Whenever a creature within 10 feet attempts
a melee attack against a wemmuth or uses Acrobatics to
Tumble Through its space, that creature takes 1d12+10
piercing damage.
U-Z
327

326
WENDIGO WORSHIP
Some humanoids who dwell in
arctic regions offer tribute to
wendigos that hunt near their
villages, treating them as gods
or spirits of nature that must
be appeased. They occasionally
perform rites of cannibalism and
place fetishes throughout the
wilderness to mark the
wendigo’s domain.
Wendigo
Wendigos are incarnations of the fears of starvation, loneliness, and fatal exposure
to cold weather. They haunt the frozen expanses of the world.
WENDIGO CREATURE 17
UNCOMMON CE LARGE BEAST COLD
Perception +32; darkvision, heatsight 60 feet
Languages Aklo, Common, Jotun; telepathy 1 mile
Skills Acrobatics +32, Athletics +33, Deception +29, Intimidation +33, Nature +28,
Occultism +29, Religion +28, Stealth +30, Survival +30
Str +8, Dex +7, Con +9, Int +6, Wis +5, Cha +6
Heatsight (divination, primal); Heatsight is a precise sense that sees heat signatures.
AC 40; Fort +32, Ref +30, Will +26; +1 status to all saves vs. magic
HP 315, regeneration 30 (deactivated by cold iron); Immunities cold, fear; Weaknesses
cold iron 10, fire 15
Speed fly 100 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +33 (cold, magical, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10+12 piercing plus
2d6 cold
Melee [one-action] claw +33 (cold, magical, agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8+12 slashing
plus 2d6 cold and Grab
Primal Innate Spells DC 38; 8th wind walk (at will);
4th nightmare (see dream haunting)
Primal Rituals DC 38; control weather
Dream Haunting A target that fails its save against the
wendigo’s nightmare is exposed to wendigo torment.
Howl [three-actions] (auditory, concentrate, enchantment, fear,
incapacitation, mental, primal); Frequency Three times per day;
Effect The wendigo unleashes a forlorn howl that can be heard up
to 1 mile away. Any creature that hears the howl must succeed at a DC
38 Will save or be frightened 1. Any creature that critically fails and is
within 120 feet of the wendigo is instead frightened 3, and is also fleeing
for 1d4 rounds (or until it’s no longer frightened, whichever comes first). A
creature frightened by a wendigo’s howl still naturally recovers from its fright
but can’t reduce it below frightened 1 in this way until 1 hour has passed or magic is
used. Whether it succeeds or fails its save, a creature is then temporarily immune to
that wendigo’s Howl for 24 hours.
Ride the Wind [reaction] (air, concentrate, primal, transmutation); Trigger The wendigo
casts wind walk while it has Grabbed a foe. Effect The wendigo attempts
to turn the grabbed creature into wind and carry it along as part of the
action. If the target succeeds at a DC 38 Will save, it prevents itself
from being transformed; in this case, the wendigo still transforms,
automatically releasing the victim. A creature forced to Ride
the Wind along with the wendigo is exposed to wendigo
torment. The target can attempt a new Will save each
round to return to normal, though it immediately becomes
corporeal and begins falling if it succeeds.
Wendigo Torment (curse, enchantment, mental,
primal) A creature affected by wendigo
torment can’t recover beyond stage 1 until it
has been restored to full HP. Saving Throw
Will DC 38; Stage 1 Stupefied 4 (1 day); Stage 2
As stage 1 (1 day); Stage 3 The creature searches
for an individual of its own ancestry to kill and devour.
It then becomes affected by wind walk and sprints into the sky so fast that its feet burn
away into jagged stumps. As the creature wind walks into the sky, it is replaced by a
new wendigo over 2d6 minutes. Wish, similar magic, or a 9th-level resurrect ritual can
return the victim to life. The new wendigo remains even if the victim is resurrected.
U-Z
329

328
BUILDING
WERECREATURES
The curse of the werecreature
comes in myriad forms and can
affect any humanoid, allowing
you to make a wide variety of
werecreatures for your adventures.
When you need to create a
werecreature for your game, you
can do so in one of two ways. You
can simply build the werecreature
from the ground up, using the
standard rules for monster
creation (this is how the werebear,
wererat, and werewolf presented
on these pages were built). Or you
can use the guidelines presented
under “Creating Werecreatures”
to turn an existing creature (or
even a player character!) into
a werecreature. In either case,
specific werecreature abilities
like Change Shape, curse of the
werecreature, and moon frenzy
work the same.
Werecreature
Werecreatures are humanoids doomed to transform into animals and animalhumanoid hybrids under the light of the full moon. These shapechanging creatures
are the result of an ancient primal curse that they can, in turn, transmit through
their own bites. Their ability to lurk unseen in the wilds as well as among people,
combined with the contagiousness of their condition, makes werecreatures a
perennial cause of panicked suspicion.
Afflicted and True Werecreatures
Werecreatures come in two types: those afflicted with the curse and those born
with it (“true werecreatures”).
One can be born a true werecreature to any werecreature parent. A true
werecreature is always a werecreature and retains the same memories and most
of the same statistics in all forms. A true werecreature also has full control over its
shapechanging except during the full moon, when the transformation is irresistible.
There is no known way to break the curse on a true werecreature.
Affected werewolves received their curse from the bite of another werecreature
(which could’ve been an afflicted or true werecreature). An afflicted werecreature
may be unaware of its curse because it retains no memories of its transformations,
gets no benefit from being a werecreature when not transformed, and has no
conscious control over its transformation. An afflicted werecreature’s curse can be
removed like any other.
Creating Werecreatures
You can turn an existing, living humanoid into a werecreature by completing the
following steps. (These changes reflect a werecreature in its hybrid form.)
Increase the creature’s level by 1 and change its statistics as follows.
• It gains the beast and werecreature traits, and its alignment is usually
adjusted to match that of its werecreature type.
• Increase its size by one category if the animal is a larger size than the
base humanoid.
• Increase its AC, attack bonuses, DCs, saving throws, and skill modifiers by 1.
• Increase its damage with Strikes and other offensive abilities by 1. If the
werecreature is limited in how often it can use an ability (such as a breath
weapon), increase the damage by 2 instead.
• Increase its HP by the amount shown on the table. This HP increase is more
than typical in order to compensate for the creature’s weakness to silver.
• The creature gains weakness to silver as shown on the table.
Starting Level HP Increase Weakness to Silver
4 or lower +25 5
5–7 +35 7
8–14 +50 10
15+ +75 15
Werecreature Abilities
All werecreatures gain the following abilities, some of which match an ability of
the animal the werecreature transforms into. You might also need to adjust some
abilities that conflict with the theme of the werecreature (such as abilities with a
conflicting alignment trait).
Senses The werecreature gains all the senses of the animal.
Animal Empathy (divination, primal) A werecreature can communicate with animals of
the same general kind.
Claws The werecreature gains a claw Strike (an agile unarmed attack that deals slashing
damage). If it had any agile attacks, the damage dealt by its claws should be roughly
the same as the damage dealt by those attacks. If it had only non-agile attacks, its
claws should deal three-quarters that damage.
U-Z
329

328
RETAINING HUMANITY
Werecreatures are notorious for
their murderous rampages in the
deep of the night-violence that is
often at odds with the afflicted’s
true nature. Even an honorable
town guard or priest could be
a murderous werewolf without
realizing it, for the werecreature’s
curse leaves the afflicted with
no memory of their nocturnal
murder sprees.
Jaws The creature gains a jaws Strike (an unarmed attack that deals piercing damage)
that inflicts its curse of the werecreature. If it had any non-agile attacks, the damage
dealt by its jaws should be roughly the same as the damage dealt by those attacks. If
it had only agile attacks, its jaws should deal one-third more damage.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation) The werecreature
changes into its humanoid, hybrid, or animal shape. Each shape has a specific,
persistent appearance. A true werecreature’s natural form is its hybrid shape. In
humanoid shape, the werecreature uses its original humanoid size, loses its jaws and
claws Strikes, and gains a melee fist Strike that deals bludgeoning damage equal to
the slashing damage dealt by its claw. In animal shape, its Speed and size change to
that of the animal, it gains any special Strike effects of the animal that it didn’t already
have (such as Grab), and it loses its weapon Strikes.
Curse of the Werecreature (curse, necromancy, primal) This curse affects only humanoids.
Saving Throw Fortitude DC is the standard DC for the werecreature’s new level – 1. On
each full moon, the cursed creature must succeed at another Fortitude save or turn into
the same kind of werecreature until dawn. The creature is under the GM’s control and
goes on a rampage for half the night before falling unconscious until dawn.
Moon Frenzy (polymorph, primal, transmutation) When a full moon appears in the
night sky, the werecreature must enter hybrid form, can’t Change Shape thereafter,
becomes one size larger, increases its reach by 5 feet, and increases the damage of
its jaws by 2. When the moon sets or the sun rises, the werecreature
returns to humanoid form and is fatigued for 2d4 hours.
Wererat
Wererats tend to be selfishly opportunistic, avaricious, and
paranoid as a result of their curse. Because wererats
typically dwell in metropolitan areas where they can
hide in plain sight, practically any city-goer could be a
wererat in disguise-from the quiet shopkeep to the
city’s criminal mastermind. The bustle of crowds and
countless rat-holes make ghettos and shantytowns
favored homes for wererats, especially since in these
poorer districts the wererat can kill out of greed or
fear with little chance of the authorities noticing. In
some cities, wererats operate entire thieves’ guilds
or organized crime rings, and membership requires
willfully submitting to the wererat’s cursed bite. Wererats look very
similar to ratfolk when in hybrid form, apart from potential
differences in size, but ratfolk have no love for these monsters.
WERERAT CREATURE 2
LE MEDIUM BEAST HUMAN HUMANOID WERECREATURE
Perception +8; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common; rat empathy
Skills Acrobatics +8 Athletics +6 (+8 to Climb or Swim), Deception
+5, Society +4, Stealth +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items hand crossbow (20 bolts), leather armor, shortsword
Rat Empathy (divination, primal) The wererat can communicate
with rodents.
AC 19; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +8
HP 45; Weaknesses silver 5
Nimble Dodge [reaction] Trigger The wererat is targeted with
a melee or ranged attack by an attacker it can see.
Effect The wererat gains a +2 circumstance bonus to
AC against the triggering attack.
Speed 25 feet
U-Z
331

330
Melee [one-action] shortsword +10 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d6+2 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +10 (finesse), Damage 1d8+2 piercing plus curse of the wererat
Ranged [one-action] hand crossbow +10 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6 piercing
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation) Human with fist +10
for 1d4+2 bludgeoning, or Small rat with Speed 30 feet, climb 10 feet.
Curse of the Wererat (curse, necromancy, primal); Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude
Moon Frenzy (polymorph, primal, transmutation)
Sneak Attack The wererat deals 1d6 extra precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Werewolf
The curse of the werewolf-known as lycanthropy to many-instills in its carriers the
hungry bloodlust and predatory instincts of the wolf. Werewolves tend to dwell on the
fringes of society or in small settlements where, in their humanoid forms, they work
as laborers, hunters, farmers, or trappers. At night, however, these same villagers
transform into violent killers and sadistic stalkers who prey on their neighbors.
Werewolves are the quintessential werecreature, and the first that comes to mind
when most people speak of such beings.
Although most werewolves hide their curse by adopting
solitary lifestyles, some retain the pack mentality of true
wolves. A small group of such werewolves typically
forms a family-like pack, with the eldest or most
powerful serving as the leader; new pack mates are
hand-chosen and inculcated into the family as its
influence grows.
WEREWOLF CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM BEAST HUMAN HUMANOID WERECREATURE
Perception +9; low-light vision, scent (imprecise)
30 feet
Languages Common; wolf empathy
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +9, Survival +10
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items battle axe, composite shortbow
(20 arrows), studded leather armor
Wolf Empathy (divination, primal)
The werewolf can communicate
with lupines.
AC 19; Fort +11, Ref +9, Will +7
HP 63; Weaknesses silver 5
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] battle axe +11 (sweep), Damage 1d8+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile), Damage 1d6+8 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d8+8 piercing plus curse of the werewolf
Ranged [one-action] composite shortbow +9 (deadly 1d10, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal, transmutation) Human with fist +11 for
1d4+8 bludgeoning, or wolf with Speed 40 feet and jaws with Knockdown.
Curse of the Werewolf (curse, necromancy, primal); Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude
Moon Frenzy (polymorph, primal, transmutation)
Pack Attack The werewolf’s Strikes deal 1d6 extra damage to creatures within reach of
at least two of the werewolf’s allies.
Werebear
Unlike many other types of werecreature, a werebear does not become
malevolent during its involuntary transformations, but is instead filled with
WOLFSBANE
Wolfsbane (Core Rulebook 553)
is a poisonous plant that can cure
the curse of the werecreature. It’s
effective only if consumed before the
creature transforms for the first time.
If the creature survives wolfsbane’s
effects without using magic to aid in
surviving, the creature can attempt
a new saving throw against the
curse of the werecreature. On a
success, the creature is cured.
U-Z
331

330
righteous conviction. This indignation can still manifest in violent ways, though,
as a transformed werebear becomes temporarily blind to its alliances and has
little control over its bestial temper. As a result, werebears are loners, rarely
even living together as families longer than necessary. Werebears know that as
long as they live solitary lives, they can serve as protectors and guardians in
wilderness regions without the overwhelming fear that, when the moon is full
and the curse takes hold, they will rage against an innocent bystander or loved
one. As long as there is nothing around to threaten it or the natural area it
protects (typically a forest), a werebear in its animal form is generally content
to forage and sleep away the night.
WEREBEAR CREATURE 4
UNCOMMON LG LARGE BEAST HUMAN HUMANOID WERECREATURE
Perception +11; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Common; bear empathy
Skills Athletics +12, Medicine +9, Nature +11, Stealth +11, Survival +11
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha –1
Items chain shirt, greataxe, hatchet (8)
Bear Empathy (divination, primal) The werebear can communicate with
ursines.
AC 23; Fort +12, Ref +10, Will +10
HP 75; Weaknesses silver 5
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +13 (agile, reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+7 slashing
plus Grab
Melee [one-action] greataxe +13 (reach 10 feet, sweep), Damage
1d12+7 slashing
Melee [one-action] hatchet +13 (agile, sweep), Damage
1d6+7 slashing
Melee [one-action] jaws +13 (reach 10 feet), Damage
1d12+7 piercing plus curse of the werebear
Ranged [one-action] hatchet +10 (agile, sweep, thrown
10 feet), Damage 1d6+7 slashing
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, polymorph, primal,
transmutation) Medium human with fist +13 for
1d4+7 bludgeoning, or grizzly bear with
Speed 35 feet.
Curse of the Werebear (curse, necromancy,
primal); Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude.
Hunt Prey [one-action] (concentrate); Requirements
The werebear can see or hear the target
or is Tracking it in exploration mode. Effect The
werebear gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception
checks when it Seeks its prey and a +2 circumstance
bonus to Survival checks when it Tracks its prey. The
werebear also ignores the penalty for making ranged attacks
within its second range increment against the prey it’s hunting. The
werebear can designate only one creature as its hunted prey at a time.
If it uses Hunt Prey against a different creature, the prior creature
loses the designation and the new prey gains the designation. In
any case, this designation lasts until the werebear’s next daily
preparation.
Mauler The werebear gains a +2 circumstance bonus to damage rolls
against creatures it has grabbed.
Moon Frenzy (polymorph, primal, transmutation)
Precision Edge The werebear deals 1d8 additional precision damage on
its first successful Strike against its hunted target on each of its turns.
OTHER WERECREATURES
In theory, any animal could
form the basis for a new type of
werecreature, provided the animal
in question is at least omnivorous-
herbivorous werecreatures are all
but unheard of. Werecreatures that
rise from insects, arachnids, and
similar invertebrate animals are
particularly unsettling, though much
rarer than werecreatures
of vertebrate animals.
U-Z
333

332
OTHER WIGHTS
In addition to the wight presented
here, many other varieties exist.
For example, the covetous cairn
wight-ritually created to eternally
guard its own wealth or that of its
master-haunts barrows, ossuaries,
and mausoleums. Unlike other
wights, cairn wights can channel
their life-draining touch through
their melee weapons.
Wight
Wights are undead humanoids that, much like wraiths, can drain the life from
living creatures with but a touch. They arise as a result of necromantic rituals,
especially violent deaths, or the sheer malevolent will of the deceased.
As many types of wights exist as types of people from which they might be
created. Hulking brutes, skittering sneaks, and cunning tinkers all make for
different wights with different niches to fill. Environment, too, plays a part in
determining a wight’s special abilities and defenses. Frost wights, for instances,
can be found in the parts of the world where exposure is a common end.
Regardless, wights typically haunt burial grounds, catacombs, or other places
of the dead. But their hunger is targeted toward the living-those individuals
who remind them of the shackles of mortality and whom they feel compelled
to “free” to the state of undeath.
A single wight can wreak a lot of havoc if it is compelled to rise from its tomb.
Because creatures slain by wights become wights as well, all it takes is a single
wight and a handful of unlucky graveyard visitors to create a veritable horde
of these undead. Thus, canny
priests and adventurers know
that the best solution to a
wight problem is swift and
total eradication. Care
must be taken, though,
to destroy wight spawn
before attempting to destroy
the parent wight, for spawn without a master
gain the ability to create spawn of their own.
Durable and sustained as they are by negative energy,
wights can last in harsh environments without decaying the
way some lesser undead do. They might dwell in high mountain
passes, sealed passageways, or submerged in bogs or lakes for decades
or even centuries before the passage of an unsuspecting traveler rouses
them from their rest.
WIGHT CREATURE 3
LE MEDIUM UNDEAD WIGHT
Perception +10; darkvision
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Athletics +11, Intimidation +9, Stealth +6
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +4, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +2
AC 18; Fort +11, Ref +6, Will +10
HP 50, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyze, poison,
unconscious
Final Spite [reaction] Trigger The wight is reduced to 0 Hit Points. Effect The wight makes
a Strike before being destroyed. It doesn’t gain any temporary HP from drain life
on this Strike.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +12, Damage 1d6+4 slashing plus drain life
Drain Life (divine, necromancy) When the wight damages a living creature with its
claw Strike, the wight gains 3 temporary Hit Points and the creature must succeed
at a DC 17 Fortitude save or become drained 1. Further damage dealt by the wraith
increases the amount of drain by 1 on a failed save to a maximum of drained 4.
Wight Spawn (divine, necromancy) A living humanoid slain by a wight’s claw Strike rises
as a wight after 1d4 rounds. This wight spawn is under the command of the wight
that killed it. It doesn’t have Drain Life or Wight Spawn and becomes clumsy 2 for as
long as it is a wight spawn. If the creator of the wight spawn dies, the wight spawn
becomes a full-fledged, autonomous wight; it regains its free will, gains Drain Life and
Wight Spawn, and is no longer clumsy.
U-Z
333

332
EYES OF THE DEAD
The elder goddess Nhimbaloth,
the so-called "Empty Death," is
said by many to be the source
of all will-o’-wisps. Cultists of
Nhimbaloth claim she has no true
form, but is merely a presence
that can be felt by all in danger
of a pointless and futile death.
These same cultists maintain that
all will-o’-wisps are Nhimbaloth’s
eyes, and it is through these
fear-devouring creatures that she
looks upon all worlds from an
eldritch realm beyond even the
very concept of death.
Will-o’-Wisp
Malevolent balls of colored light, will-o’-wisps haunt lonely marshes and forests
where they lure unsuspecting travelers into danger. Will-o’-wisps can vary the
color and illumination they shed, and delight in mimicking bobbing lanterns
or distant fires to draw lost or disoriented travelers off of safe trails. They can
extinguish their illumination entirely to become invisible, and they enjoy doing
so once their victims are wholly lost and have realized that the bobbing light
in the distance isn’t, in fact, leading them to safety. Even invisible, however, a
will-o’-wisp rarely ventures far from its target, as it feasts upon the panic and
dread felt by its victims.
Beneath its glow, a will-o’-wisp’s body is a spongy ball approximately 1 foot in
diameter and weighing less than 5 pounds. Although most will-o’-wisps are merely
translucent, featureless orbs, gaining definition only in the shifting illumination
they create, a few have dark mottling that makes them resemble a skull when
viewed closely. Will-o’-wisps have no need for mundane nourishment, and in fact
lack the ability to consume matter of any kind; they find all the sustenance they
need in the terror of nearby creatures. For this reason, they like to work alongside
undead that produce terror in their victims. Will-o’-wisps are long-lived, if not
effectively immortal, and they have good memories. A cowed or defeated willo’-wisp can be a good source of lore and information, though acquiring such
cooperation from such a sinister monster is no easy feat.
Will-o’-wisps inhabit desolate swamps and forests and are generally active
at twilight and after dark. They are therefore reluctant to lead victims into
immediately fatal areas such as deadfalls, but instead prefer hazards where their
victims suffer over a long time, such as pockets of stale or poisonous air, patches
of quicksand, and dens of bigger monsters. According to will-o’-wisps, different
types of fear have subtle differences in flavor. The lurking dread in the pit of the
stomach that gnaws at those who slowly become aware of the fact that they’re
lost produces a much different taste than the sudden stark terror of imminent
death in the face of a towering monster. Because of this, will-o’-wisps try to vary
the ways in which they induce terror in their prey, to ensure they don’t tire of
certain flavors of fear.
WILL-O’-WISP CREATURE 6
CE SMALL ABERRATION AIR
Perception +16; darkvision
Languages Aklo, Common
Skills Acrobatics +18, Deception +12, Intimidation +12, Stealth +16
Str –5, Dex +6, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +2
AC 27; Fort +10, Ref +16, Will +14
HP 50; Immunities magic
Glow (aura, light) 20 feet. A will-o’-wisp is itself naturally invisible,
but glows with a colored light, casting bright light in the aura and
making it visible.
Magic Immunity A will-o’-wisp is immune to all spells except faerie
fire, glitterdust, magic missile, and maze.
Speed fly 50 feet
Melee [one-action] shock +17 (electricity, magical), Damage 2d8+4 electricity
Feed on Fear [one-action] (concentrate); Requirement An enemy is under a fear
effect or dying within 15 feet of the will-o’-wisp. Effect The will-o’-
wisp feeds on the creature’s terror. It regains 2d4 Hit Points, and if
it has Gone Dark, its glow reignites. A will-o’-wisp can take this action
only once per round.
Go Dark [one-action] (concentrate) The will-o’-wisp extinguishes its glow, becoming invisible.
It can end this effect with another use of this action. If it uses its shock attack while
invisible, the arc of electricity lets any observer determine its location, making the
will-o’-wisp only hidden to all observers until it moves.
U-Z
335

334
WOLF PACKS
Wolf packs claim and defend large
swaths of territory, which they
regularly patrol in search of both
prey and competitors. It takes a
pack roughly 10 days to cover
the entire breadth of its territory,
which can stretch for miles in any
direction but usually adheres to
natural terrain. Wolves keep claim
over their territories by marking
trees with their scent and howling
to keep other packs away. If these
warnings prove insufficient to
drive off potential competitors, the
pack attacks the intruders directly.
Wolf
Wolves roam forests, hills, and other wild lands, where they hunt in packs to
beleaguer and surround their prey before going in for the kill. Like most predatory
animals, wolves prefer to attack the weakest or most vulnerable prey they can find.
Wolf
Wolves live and hunt in packs, which, contrary to popular belief, are not led by
the strongest in the group, but typically consist of a mated pair, their pups, and
juvenile offspring from previous mating seasons. Offspring generally leave their
parents’ pack upon reaching maturity, at which point they seek out mates of their
own to go form their own packs elsewhere.
Humanoids are not traditionally viewed as prey animals by wolves, but
extraordinary circumstances can lead these animals to attack people, especially in
winter months and other situations where traditional prey (deer and elk, mainly)
is scarce. Some beings, such as powerful vampires, can call upon wolves to aid
them in combat.
WOLF CREATURE 1
N MEDIUM ANIMAL
Perception +7; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +5, Stealth +7, Survival +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha –2
AC 15; Fort +6, Ref +9, Will +5
HP 24
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +9, Damage 1d6+2 piercing plus Knockdown
Pack Attack The wolf’s Strikes deal 1d4 extra damage to creatures within reach of at
least two of the wolf’s allies.
Dire Wolf
Much larger and more foul-tempered than their common
cousins, dire wolves haunt primeval lands that accommodate
their massive size and proportionately large hunting
grounds and appetites. Orcs are fond of using dire
wolves as mounts, finding their vicious tempers
perfect for hunting and warfare.
DIRE WOLF CREATURE 3
N LARGE ANIMAL
Perception +10; low-light vision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +12, Stealth +8, Survival +10
Str +5, Dex +3, Con +4, Int –4, Wis +3, Cha –2
AC 18; Fort +11, Ref +8, Will +8
HP 50
Buck [reaction] DC 20
Speed 35 feet
Melee [one-action] jaws +12 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10+5 piercing
plus Knockdown or Grab
Pack Attack The dire wolf’s Strikes deal 1d6 extra damage
to creatures within reach of at least two of the
wolf’s allies.
Worry [one-action] (attack); Requirements
The dire wolf has a creature
grabbed with its jaws. Effect
The dire wolf fiercely shakes the
grabbed creature with its teeth, dealing
1d10+2 damage (DC 20 basic Fortitude save).
U-Z
335

334
DREAD WRAITHS
Dread wraiths are much more
powerful variants of the standard
wraith. A dread wraith is a
9th-level creature that can drain
the life from creatures via its
mere presence. Often, a dread
wraith commands a small group
of normal wraiths, and in life may
have been a bloodthirsty warlord
or brutal general.
Wraith
Wraiths are malevolent undead who drain life and shun light. Their shadowy,
incorporeal forms are dotted with burning eyes that reflect their hatred for the
living, and shadowy claws are weapon enough to steal the vitality from their
enemies. A wraith may be created by foul necromancy, but more often they are
the result of a hermitic murderer or mutilator who even in death could not give up
their wicked ways. Further complicating the matter is the fact that wraiths multiply
by consuming and transforming the living into more of their foul kind-meaning a
handful of wraiths left unchecked can easily turn into a horde of darkness.
Wraiths weigh nothing and are unharmed by most physical attacks. They haunt
any place where they can feed on the living, though their vulnerability to sunlight
confines them to the shadowy places of the world-places where they can blend
in seamlessly with their dark surroundings before silently engulfing their prey.
Wraiths may form packs with others of their kind in places where death
and mayhem are commonplace-countrysides ravaged by war, metropolitan
underworlds run by criminal overlords, or sites of fiendish cultic rituals. In these
places, the living do well to tread with sunrods and powerful clerics in tow. Ruins,
sewers, and abandoned buildings provide sanctuary for wraiths during the day, as
the creatures hunt exclusively at night or in dark places. Wraiths are smart enough
to take advantage of their incorporeality in combat, so they keep to tortuous
caverns or structures with hallways and avoid open areas.
As they’re formed purely of anti-life from the Negative Energy Plane, wraiths
pervade that unholy realm. Within nations and civilizations ruled by the undead,
wraiths have places of power as assassins and spies. They’re among the ruling class in
Geb, but have greater numbers in Ustalav, where packs of wraiths roam graveyards
and misty trails, consuming the populations of entire villages. In other parts of
the world, wraiths tend not to wander and limit their activity to smaller environs,
typically just the site of their chosen haunting and its immediate surroundings.
WRAITH CREATURE 6
LE MEDIUM INCORPOREAL UNDEAD WRAITH
Perception +14; darkvision, lifesense 60 feet
Languages Common, Necril
Skills Acrobatics +14, Intimidation +15, Stealth +14
Str –5, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +5
Lifesense (divination, divine) Wraiths sense the vital essence of living and undead
creatures within the listed range.
AC 24; Fort +8, Ref +14, Will +14; +1 status to all saves vs. positive
HP 80, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, paralyzed,
poison, precision, unconscious; Resistances all 5 (except force, ghost
touch, or positive; double resistance vs. non-magical)
Sunlight Powerlessness A wraith caught in sunlight is stunned 2 and
clumsy 2.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed fly 40 feet
Melee [one-action] spectral hand +17 (finesse), Damage 2d8+5 negative plus drain life
Drain Life (divine, necromancy) When the wraith damages a living
creature with its spectral hand Strike, the wraith gains 5 temporary
Hit Points and the creature must succeed at a DC 23 Fortitude save
or become drained 1. Further damage dealt by the wraith increases
the amount of drain by 1 on a failed save to a maximum of drained 4.
Wraith Spawn (divine, necromancy) A living humanoid slain by a wraith’s
spectral hand Strike rises as a wraith spawn after 1d4 rounds. This wraith
spawn is under the command of the wraith that killed it. It doesn’t have drain life or
wraith spawn and becomes clumsy 2 for as long as it is a wraith spawn. If the creator
of the wraith spawn dies, the wraith spawn becomes a full-fledged, autonomous
wraith; it regains its free will, gains Wraith Spawn, and is no longer clumsy.
U-Z
337

336
XULGATH TREASURE
Xulgaths are relatively primitive,
using tools and weapons of stone
and other materials scavenged
from the surface. These can
replicate most simple and a few
martial melee weapons, as well as
simple thrown ranged weapons.
An advanced tribe of xulgaths
might be able to craft low-level
magical talismans, such as a
potency crystal or a
returning clasp.
Xulgath
Reptilian humanoids who live in the uppermost reaches of the Darklands, xulgaths
(known as troglodytes to many surface-dwelling folk) often attack intruders in
their territory on sight. They live in simple familial communities, battling rival
groups and other aggressive Darklands inhabitants in order to survive. They
occasionally raid surface settlements, usually at the behest of cruel, bloodthirsty
leaders who are often themselves in the thrall of more powerful creatures like
nagas or demons. A typical xulgath has dull gray, dark gray, or ashen scales, with
a long tail and bony protrusions that run the length of its spine. A typical xulgath
is 5 feet tall and weighs 150 pounds.
Although today the xulgaths are brutal and scattered, they were one of the first
intelligent humanoids to rise in the primeval world, once ruling over a mighty
empire that stretched throughout the Darklands. Today, all that remains of this
era are ruins of massive stone ziggurats and crumbling cities found within some
of the larger caverns. Some groups of xulgaths continue to live among these ruins,
venerating their ancestors’ accomplishments, while others consider these areas
taboo and leave them to become infested with Darklands vermin. Sages don’t
agree on why the ancient xulgath civilization fell. Some suspect it was the result
of a loss of several wars waged against serpentfolk, while others suggest that the
corruptive influence of demon worship rotted their culture from within.
Certainly, many xulgath settlements continue to worship demons to this
day, paying homage and offering live sacrifices to terrible creatures from
the Abyss. Occasionally, a xulgath shaman can call forth and bind a lesser
demon to help serve the group, but a shaman who delves too deep into
occultism might summon a more powerful fiend that either tears the
xulgaths to pieces or enslaves them.
Xulgath Warrior
Xulgath warriors strike with fury and eager cruelty, always ready for
the next fight. The taking of prizes from battle-including weapons and
items stolen from defeated foes along with grislier trophies harvested
from fallen victims’ flesh-is a popular pursuit among these vicious
reptiles, and those whose armor and scales are most adorned are
awarded the greatest respect (and perhaps fear) from their kin.
XULGATH WARRIOR CREATURE 1
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID XULGATH
Perception +6; darkvision
Languages Draconic, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +7, Stealth +5
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items club, javelin (3)
AC 16; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 21
Stench (aura, olfactory) 30 feet. A creature that enters the area
must attempt a DC 16 Fortitude save. On a failure, the creature is
sickened 1, and on a critical failure, the creature also takes a –5-foot
status penalty to its Speeds for 1 round. While within the aura,
the creature takes a –2 circumstance penalty to saves to recover
from the sickened condition. A creature that succeeds at its save
is temporarily immune to all xulgaths’ stenches for 1 minute.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] club +9, Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Melee [one-action] jaws +9, Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +9 (agile), Damage 1d4+4 slashing
Ranged [one-action] club +7 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] javelin +7 (thrown 30 feet), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
U-Z
337

336
XULGATH SOCIETY
Xulgaths respect strength, and the
leader of a community is usually the
strongest of all of them. The leader’s
dominance is rarely questioned
until a potentially stronger xulgath
believes it’s time for a change in
rulership. The two xulgaths then
face off in a fight to the death, with
the victor claiming rule.
Xulgath Skulker
Xulgath warrens are patrolled-some might say “haunted”-by the community’s
skulkers. These xulgaths specialize in stealth, striking swiftly from the shadows
and otherwise ambushing foes.
XULGATH SKULKER CREATURE 2
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID XULGATH
Perception +7; darkvision
Languages Draconic, Undercommon
Skills Acrobatics +8, Stealth +8, Thievery +8
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items dagger (4)
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +5
HP 28
Stench (aura, olfactory) 30 feet. As xulgath warrior.
Stench Suppression [free-action] A xulgath skulker can suppress its stench aura as a free action
to better hide its presence. The skulker can resume its stench aura as a free action.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] dagger +10 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] jaws +9, Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw +10 (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4+3 slashing
Ranged [one-action] dagger +10 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Hidden Movement If a xulgath skulker starts its turn undetected by a creature or merely
hidden from it, that creature is flat-footed against the skulker’s attacks until the end
of the skulker’s turn.
Sneak Attack A xulgath skulker deals an additional 1d6 precision damage to
flat-footed creatures.
Xulgath Leader
Xulgath leaders are usually the strongest, most violent
members of a community-although in some cases,
particularly in larger groups, xulgath tribes are led by
powerful demon cultists or other monsters who seek to
use the xulgaths as servants or slaves.
XULGATH LEADER CREATURE 3
CE MEDIUM HUMANOID XULGATH
Perception +9; darkvision
Languages Draconic, Undercommon
Skills Athletics +11, Intimidation +6,
Stealth +6
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +2, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items breastplate, greataxe, javelin (4)
AC 20; Fort +9, Ref +6, Will +9
HP 44
Stench (aura, olfactory) 30 feet. As xulgath warrior, but DC 19.
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] greataxe +11 (sweep), Damage 1d10+6 slashing plus
Weakening Strike
Melee [one-action] jaws +11, Damage 1d6+6 piercing plus Weakening Strike
Melee [one-action] claw +11 (agile), Damage 1d4+6 slashing
Ranged [one-action] javelin +8 (thrown 30 feet), Damage
1d6+4 piercing
Weakening Strike [one-action] The target must
succeed at a DC 20 Fortitude save or
become enfeebled 1 (or enfeebled 2 on
a critical hit) for 1 round.
U-Z
339

338
YETI TREASURE
Lone exiles of yeti clans have little
use for treasure and leave the gear
of their slain victims behind where
it is quickly covered by snowfall.
Clan-based yetis, on the other
hand, create beautifully carved
stonework, some of which they
shape into protective talismans of
rare beauty.
Yeti
Nearly a myth, the yeti is rarely seen-and even when it is, it is often too late.
Yetis dwell amid the highest, most remote peaks of the world, coming down
from their snowy mountain holds to raid, steal livestock, and sometimes feed
their insatiable urges for slaughter and destruction. Those folks who live at the
foot of a yeti-ruled mountain warn of the “abominable snowmen”: monstrous,
fur-covered humanoids who leave strange and bloody tracks in the snow.
Normally yetis seek to protect the world rather than hunt its other civilized
denizens. They do so by lairing near eldritch portals that form links between
the Material Plane and other, much stranger dimensions of reality. From within
these snow-covered arches and ancient stone doorways, aliens, living nightmares,
fiends, and worse can emerge through dimensional networks into the world. Yetis
who guard these portals sometimes succumb to these horrors and are corrupted,
taking on the bloodthirsty urges and horrific behaviors of the very monsters they
strive to protect the world against. Yetis who manifest such violent tendencies
are driven out of their clan and forced to wander the mountaintops alone, thus
giving rise to the myth of the legendary abominable snowman. Forced to fend
for themselves, these exiled yetis often fully embrace the corrupting elements that
caused their exile in the first place, growing more powerful and more deadly as
a result. The most vile of these yetis turn to cannibalism, not out of need, but
out of a sheer joy at the terror they inflict upon their kin. Invariably such
cannibalistic yetis attract the attention of wendigos, which makes a bad
situation all the worse.
YETI CREATURE 5
UNCOMMON N LARGE HUMANOID
Perception +15; darkvision, scent (imprecise) 30 feet
Languages Aklo
Skills Athletics +14, Stealth +12 (+15 in
snow), Survival +11
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –1,
Wis +4, Cha –1
Snowblind When Hiding, the yeti
is concealed by any snowfall, even
if it’s not thick enough to make other
creatures concealed.
AC 21; Fort +15, Ref +11, Will +13; +4 status to all saves vs. fear and dreams
HP 115; Immunities cold; Weaknesses fire 10
Nightmare Guardian Yetis gain a +4 status bonus to saves against fear and
against spells and abilities that affect dreams. A yeti that falls prey to a
supernatural nightmare loses this ability and becomes permanently enraged,
gaining a +1 status bonus to attack and damage rolls and a –1 status penalty
to AC.
Vanish [reaction] Trigger The yeti is hidden or undetected while not in combat,
and a creature would observe it. Effect The yeti Strides or Climbs up to
half its Speed to a location where it can Hide, then Hides. If its new Stealth
check result meets or exceeds the triggering creature’s Perception DC, the yeti
remains hidden.
Speed 35 feet, climb 20 feet
Melee [one-action] claw +15, Damage 2d10+5 slashing
Grisly Arrival [free-action] (emotion, fear, mental); Trigger The yeti hits a creature in
the first round of combat and the yeti was hidden from that creature at
the start of combat. Effect Each enemy within 30 feet that witnesses the
attack (including the target of the attack) must attempt a DC 23 Will
save. On a failure, the creature is frightened 2; on a critical failure, it’s
frightened 4.
Rend [one-action] claw
U-Z
339

338
ZARAMUUN TREASURE
Zaramuuns collect treasure from
mortals they have robbed or
sacrificed. They are attracted to
gems, rare metals, and potent
pieces of crafted earth, particularly
powerful magic items associated
with the Plane of Earth.
Zaramuun
Zaramuuns are beings of elemental sand that hide in deserts and wastelands. They
disguise themselves as massive dunes before rising up to attack living creatures. The
most infamous zaramuuns kill any living creatures they find, but others simply rob
their victims of all metal and stone possessions before fleeing. Although zaramuuns
insist they are only reclaiming what was taken from their ancestral earth, this is
simple self-delusion; most zaramuuns use their stolen goods as payment and material
components to conjure fiends, for Zaramuuns were exiled from the Plane of Earth
after worshipping fiends who promised to give them power over other elementals.
This worship gradually transformed into servitude, and now many zaramuuns believe
that if they send enough souls to their masters, they will be set free.
ZARAMUUN CREATURE 16
CE LARGE EARTH ELEMENTAL
Perception +30; darkvision, tremorsense 60 feet
Languages Abyssal, Terran
Skills Athletics +31 (+35 to Disarm stone or metal objects), Religion +26, Stealth +27
(+30 in sandy terrain)
Str +9, Dex +5, Con +6, Int +0, Wis +5, Cha –1
AC 39; Fort +34, Ref +30, Will +25
HP 291; Immunities paralyzed, poison, sleep
Attack of Opportunity [reaction]
Speed 35 feet, burrow 35 feet; sand glide
Melee [one-action] fist +33, Damage 4d12+13 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] rock or metal debris +29 (range increment 120 feet), Damage 4d8+13 bludgeoning
Divine Innate Spells DC 37, attack +31; 8th dimensional anchor (at will); 6th disintegrate,
spirit blast; 4th suggestion (at will); Constant (8th) dimensional anchor
Divine Rituals DC 37; planar ally
Dune [one-action] (concentrate); Until the next time it acts, the zaramuun appears to be a sand
dune. It has an automatic result of 47 (50 in sandy terrain) on Deception and Stealth
checks and DCs to pass as a sand dune. Any creature that walks onto the zaramuun
moves into its body and is Engulfed.
Engulf [two-actions] DC 35, 4d12 bludgeoning damage and dimensional anchor, Escape DC 32,
Rupture 28
Raking Sand [one-action] Requirements The zaramuun hit with a melee Strike with its last
action, or it has a creature Engulfed. Effect The zaramuun attempts to Disarm one
primarily metal or stone object from the Struck or Engulfed creature and casts its
innate dimensional anchor on the target creature.
Sand Glide The zaramuun can Burrow through sand and dirt (but not
stone) at its full burrow Speed, leaving no tunnel or sign of its passing.
Any Engulfed creatures are left behind when it Burrows. Loose
sand and scree are not difficult terrain for a zaramuun.
Sandblast [two-actions] (earth); The zaramuun sprays a blast of
sand that deals 11d10 slashing
damage to all creatures in
a 60-foot line (Reflex DC
38). It can’t Sandblast
again for 1d4 rounds.
Critical Success No
effect.
Success Half damage.
Failure Full damage.
Critical Failure Full
damage and blinded
for 1 round.
U-Z
341
340
CREATING ZOMBIES
To create a zombie creature, start
with a zombie of the appropriate
size. Then add any Strikes, Speeds,
or other abilities it would gain from
its shape. To create a Gargantuan
zombie, begin with the zombie hulk,
apply the elite adjustments, change
its size to Gargantuan, and increase
its reach by 5 feet.
Zombie
A zombie’s only desire is to consume the living. Unthinking and ever-shambling
harbingers of death, zombies stop only when they’re destroyed.
Zombie Abilities
You can modify zombies with the following zombie abilities. Most zombies have
one of these abilities; If you give a zombie more, you might want to increase its
level and adjust its statistics.
Disgusting Pustules (disease, necromancy) The zombie is covered in pustules that
rupture when it takes any piercing damage or any critical hit. In either case, adjacent
creatures are hit with vile fluid, causing them to become sickened 1 unless they
succeed at a Fortitude save.
Feast [two-actions](manipulate) If the zombie is adjacent to a helpless or unconscious creature,
or a deceased creature that died in the past hour, the zombie can feast upon its flesh
to heal itself. This restores an amount of Hit Points equal to the zombie’s level. If the
creature is alive, the zombie deals damage equal to its jaws, fist, or claw damage.
Plague-Ridden (disease, necromancy) The zombie carries a plague that can create more
of its own kind. This functions as the plague zombie’s zombie rot, except at stage 5,
the victim rises as another of the zombie’s type, rather than a plague zombie.
Rotting Aura (aura, disease, necromancy) The zombie emits an aura of rot and disease
that causes wounds to fester and turn sour. Any living creature that starts its turn
within 10 feet of the zombie and is not at full Hit Points takes 1d6 damage as its
wounds fester. This damage increases by 1d6 for every 6 levels the zombie has.
Creatures that take a critical hit from the zombie also take this damage immediately.
Unkillable This zombie is nigh unkillable. The zombie loses its weakness to slashing
and gains resistance against all damage equal to its level (minimum 3), and it gains
weakness equal to twice its level (minimum 6) to critical hits. Increase the zombie’s
level by 1 if you give it this ability.
Zombie Shambler
A zombie shambler is a slow-moving horror dangerous in larger groups.
ZOMBIE SHAMBLER CREATURE –1
NE MEDIUM MINDLESS UNDEAD ZOMBIE
Perception +0; darkvision
Skills Athletics +5
Str +3, Dex –2, Con +2, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –2
Slow A zombie is permanently slowed 1 and can’t use reactions.
AC 12; Fort +6, Ref +0, Will +2
HP 20, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental, paralyzed,
poison, unconscious; Weaknesses positive 5, slashing 5
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +7, Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning plus Grab
jaws [one-action] (attack); Requirement The zombie has a creature grabbed or restrained.
Effect The zombie makes a jaws unarmed melee Strike against the grabbed or
restrained creature with an attack modifier of +7 that deals 1d8+3 piercing damage.
Plague Zombie
Plague zombies are infested with hideous contagions.
PLAGUE ZOMBIE CREATURE 1
NE MEDIUM MINDLESS UNDEAD ZOMBIE
Perception +3; darkvision
Skills Athletics +7
Str +4, Dex –2, Con +3, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –2
Slow As zombie shambler.
AC 13; Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +4
U-Z
341
340
RISEN FROM THE GRAVE
Zombies are often created using
unwholesome necromantic rituals.
Among the living dead, zombies are
most often used as fodder, wearing
down defenses and consuming
resources before more powerful
undead arrive to deal the killing
blow. Zombies cannot speak or
really even think for themselves,
but they can be commanded by
other allied undead and
powerful necromancers.
HP 50, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental, paralyzed, poison,
unconscious; Weaknesses positive 10, slashing 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +9, Damage 1d8+4 bludgeoning plus Grab and zombie rot
jaws [one-action] (attack); As zombie shambler, but with an attack bonus of +9 that deals 1d12+4
piercing damage. A creature damaged by the jaws is exposed to zombie rot.
Zombie Rot (disease, necromancy); An infected creature can’t heal damage it takes from
zombie rot until it has been cured of the disease. Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Stage
1 carrier with no ill effect (1 day); Stage 2 1d6 negative damage (1 day); Stage 3 1d6
negative damage (1 day); Stage 4 1d6 negative damage (1 day); Stage 5 dead, rising as
a plague zombie immediately
Zombie Brute
Necromantic augmentations have granted this zombie increased size and power.
ZOMBIE BRUTE CREATURE 2
NE LARGE MINDLESS UNDEAD ZOMBIE
Perception +4; darkvision
Skills Athletics +9
Str +5, Dex –3, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –2
Slow As zombie shambler.
AC 15; Fort +10, Ref +3, Will +6
HP 70, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease, mental,
paralyzed, poison, unconscious; Weaknesses positive 10,
slashing 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] fist +11 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12+5
bludgeoning plus Improved Push 5 feet
Zombie Hulk
These towering horrors are animated from the corpses of monstrosities.
ZOMBIE HULK CREATURE 6
NE HUGE MINDLESS UNDEAD ZOMBIE
Perception +8; darkvision
Skills Athletics +18
Str +7, Dex –1, Con +4, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha –2
Slow As zombie shambler.
AC 21; Fort +16, Ref +9, Will +12
HP 160, negative healing; Immunities death effects, disease,
mental, paralyzed, poison, unconscious; Weaknesses positive
10, slashing 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee [one-action] hunk of meat +17 (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d10+9 bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] hunk of meat +9 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 2d10+9
bludgeoning
Ranged [one-action] corpse +17 (brutal, range increment 30 feet), Damage
2d6+9 bludgeoning
Corpse Throwing A zombie hulk can throw corpses at foes. While
any Medium dead body will do, they sometimes throw zombie
shamblers, who take just as much damage from being thrown as
the target they hit. A thrown shambler lands prone, but if it’s not
destroyed, it can rise and use other actions normally.
Wide Swing [one-action] The zombie hulk makes a hunk of meat Strike and
compares the attack roll result to the AC of up to two foes, each
of whom must be within the Strike’s reach. This attack counts
as two attacks for the zombie hulk’s multiple attack penalty.
343

342
Ability Glossary
The following creature abilities are listed here because
they are shared by many creatures or are highly complex.
The statistics for individual creatures might alter the
traits, the number of actions, or other rules of these
abilities. Anything noted in a specific creature’s stat
block overrides the general rules for the ability below.
In these abilities, “monster” is used for the creature
that has the ability, to differentiate it from any other
creatures the ability might affect.
All-Around Vision This monster can see in all directions
simultaneously, and therefore can’t be flanked.
Aquatic Ambush [one-action] Requirements The monster is hiding in
water and a creature that hasn’t detected it is within the
listed number of feet. Effect The monster moves up to
its swim Speed + 10 feet toward the triggering creature,
traveling on water and on land. Once the creature is in
reach, the monster makes a Strike against it. The creature is
flat-footed against this Strike.
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] Trigger A creature within the
monster’s reach uses a manipulate action or a move action,
makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square during a move
action it’s using. Effect The monster attempts a melee Strike
against the triggering creature. If the attack is a critical
hit and the trigger was a manipulate action, the monster
disrupts that action. This Strike doesn’t count toward the
monster’s multiple attack penalty, and its multiple attack
penalty doesn’t apply to this Strike.
At-Will Spells The monster can cast its at-will spells any
number of times without using up spell slots.
Aura A monster’s aura automatically affects everything within
a specified emanation around that monster. The monster
doesn’t need to spend actions on the aura; rather, the aura’s
effects are applied at specific times, such as when a creature
ends its turn in the aura or when creatures enter the aura.
If an aura does nothing but deal damage, its entry lists
only the radius, damage, and saving throw. Such auras deal
this damage to a creature when the creature enters the aura
and when a creature starts its turn in the aura. A creature
can take damage from the aura only once per round.
The GM might determine that a monster’s aura doesn’t
affect its own allies. For example, a creature might be
immune to a monster’ frightful presence if they have been
around each other for a long time.
Buck [reaction] Most monsters that serve as mounts can attempt to
buck off unwanted or annoying riders, but most mounts
will not use this reaction against a trusted creature unless
the mounts are spooked or mistreated. Trigger A creature
Mounts or uses the Command an Animal action while riding
the monster. Effect The triggering creature must succeed
at a Reflex saving throw against the listed DC or fall off the
creature and land prone. If the save is a critical failure, the
triggering creature also takes 1d6 bludgeoning damage in
addition to the normal damage for the fall.
Catch Rock [reaction] Requirements The monster must have a free hand
but can Release anything it’s holding as part of this reaction.
Trigger The monster is targeted with a thrown rock Strike
or a rock would fall on the monster. Effect The monster
gains a +4 circumstance bonus to its AC against the
triggering attack or to any defense against the falling rock.
If the attack misses or the monster successfully defends
against the falling rock, the monster catches the rock, takes
no damage, and is now holding the rock.
Change Shape [one-action] (concentrate, [magical tradition], polymorph,
transmutation) The monster changes its shape indefinitely.
It can use this action again to return to its natural shape
or adopt a new shape. Unless otherwise noted, a monster
cannot use Change Shape to appear as a specific individual.
Using Change Shape counts as creating a disguise for the
Impersonate use of Deception. The monster’s transformation
automatically defeats Perception DCs to determine whether
the creature is a member of the ancestry or creature type
into which it transformed, and it gains a +4 status bonus to
its Deception DC to prevent others from seeing through its
disguise. Change Shape abilities specify what shapes the
monster can adopt. The monster doesn’t gain any special
abilities of the new shape, only its physical form. For
example, in each shape, it replaces its normal Speeds and
Strikes, and might potentially change its senses or size. Any
changes are listed in its stat block.
Constant Spells A constant spell affects the monster without the
monster needing to cast it, and its duration is unlimited. If a
constant spell gets counteracted, the monster can reactivate it
by spending the normal spellcasting actions the spell requires.
Constrict [one-action] The monster deals the listed amount of damage
to any number of creatures grabbed or restrained by it.
Each of those creatures can attempt a basic Fortitude save
with the listed DC.
Coven (divination, mental, occult) This monster can form a
coven with two or more other creatures who also have the
coven ability. This involves performing an 8-hour ceremony
with all prospective coven members. After the coven is
formed, each of its members gains elite adjustments (page
6), adjusting their levels accordingly. Coven members can
sense other members’ locations and conditions by spending
a single action, which has the concentrate trait, and can
sense what another coven member is sensing as a twoaction activity, which has the concentrate trait as well.
Covens also grant spells and rituals to their members, but
these can be cast only in cooperation between three coven
members who are all within 30 feet of one another. A coven
member can contribute to a coven spell with a single-action
spellcasting activity that has a single verbal component. If
two coven members have contributed these actions within
the last round, a third member can cast a coven spell on her
turn by spending the normal spellcasting actions. A coven
can cast its coven spells an unlimited number of times
but can cast only one coven spell each round. All covens
grant the 8th-level baleful polymorph spell and all the
following spells, which the coven can cast at any level up
to 5th: augury, charm, clairaudience, clairvoyance, dream
message, illusory disguise, illusory scene, prying eye, and
talking corpse. Individual creatures with the coven ability 
343

342
also grant additional spells to any coven they join. A coven
can also cast the control weather ritual (Core Rulebook 411),
with a DC of 23 instead of the standard DC.
If a coven member leaving the coven or the death of a
coven member brings the coven below three members,
the remaining members keep their elite adjustments for
24 hours, but without enough members to contribute the
necessary actions, they can’t cast coven spells.
Darkvision A monster with darkvision can see perfectly well
in areas of darkness and dim light, though such vision is in
black and white only. Some forms of magical darkness, such
as a 4th-level darkness spell, block normal darkvision. A
monster with greater darkvision, however, can see through
even these forms of magical darkness.
Disease When a creature is exposed to a monster’s disease, it
attempts a Fortitude save or succumbs to the disease. The
level of a disease is the level of the monster inflicting the
disease. The disease follows the rules for afflictions found
on page 457 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook.
Engulf [two-actions]The monster Strides up to double its Speed and can
move through the spaces of any creatures in its path. Any
creature of the monster’s size or smaller whose space the
monster moves through can attempt a Reflex save with the
listed DC to avoid being engulfed. A creature unable to act
automatically critically fails this save. If a creature succeeds
at its save, it can choose to be either pushed aside (out of the
monster’s path) or pushed in front of the monster to the end of
the monster’s movement. The monster can attempt to Engulf
the same creature only once in a single use of Engulf. The
monster can contain as many creatures as can fit in its space.
A creature that fails its save is pulled into the monster’s
body. It is grabbed, is slowed 1, and has to hold its breath
or start suffocating. The creature takes the listed amount
of damage when first engulfed and at the end of each of
its turns while it’s engulfed. An engulfed creature can get
free by Escaping against the listed escape DC. An engulfed
creature can attack the monster engulfing it, but only with
unarmed attacks or with weapons of light Bulk or less. The
engulfing creature is flat-footed against the attack. If the
monster takes piercing or slashing damage equaling or
exceeding the listed Rupture value from a single attack or
spell, the engulfed creature cuts itself free. A creature that
gets free by either method can immediately breathe and
exits the swallowing monster’s space.
If the monster dies, all creatures it has engulfed are
automatically released as the monster’s form loses cohesion.
Fast Healing A monster with this ability regains the given
number of Hit Points each round at the beginning of its turn.
Ferocity [reaction] Trigger The monster is reduced to 0 HP. Effect The
monster avoids being knocked out and remains at 1 HP, but
its wounded value increases by 1. When it is wounded 3, it
can no longer use this ability.
Frightful Presence (aura, emotion, fear, mental) A creature that
first enters the area must attempt a Will save. Regardless of
the result of the saving throw, the creature is temporarily
immune to this monster’s Frightful Presence for 1 minute.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected by the presence.
Success The creature is frightened 1.
Failure The creature is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The creature is frightened 4.
Grab [one-action] Requirements The monster’s last action was a
success with a Strike that lists Grab in its damage entry,
or it has a creature grabbed using this action. Effect The
monster automatically Grabs the target until the end of the
monster’s next turn. The creature is grabbed by whichever
body part the monster attacked with, and that body part
can’t be used to Strike creatures until the grab is ended.
Using Grab extends the duration of the monster’s Grab
until the end of its next turn for all creatures grabbed by it.
A grabbed creature can use the Escape action to get out of
the grab, and the Grab ends for a grabbed creatures if the
monster moves away from it.
Greater Constrict [one-action] The monster deals the listed amount of
damage to any number of creatures grabbed or restrained
by it. Each of those creatures can attempt a basic Fortitude
save with the listed DC. A creature that fails this save
falls unconscious, and a creature that succeeds is then
temporarily immune to falling unconscious from Greater
Constrict for 1 minute.
Improved Grab, Improved Knockdown, or Improved Push[free-action] The
monster can use Grab, Knockdown, or Push (as appropriate)
as a free action triggered by a hit with its initial attack. A
monster with Improved Grab still needs to spend an action
to extend the duration for creatures it already has grabbed.
Knockdown [one-action] Requirements The monster’s last action was
a success with a Strike that lists Knockdown in its damage
entry. Effect The monster knocks the target prone.
Lifesense Lifesense allows a monster to sense the vital essence
of living and undead creatures within the listed range. The
sense can distinguish between the positive energy animating
living creatures and the negative energy animating undead
creatures, much as sight distinguishes colors.
Light Blindness When first exposed to bright light, the
monster is blinded until the end of its next turn. After this
exposure, light doesn’t blind the monster again until after it
spends 1 hour in darkness. However, as long as the monster
is in an area of bright light, it’s dazzled.
Low-Light Vision The monster can see in dim light as though
it were bright light, so it ignores the concealed condition
due to dim light.
Poison When a creature is exposed to a monster’s poison, it
attempts a Fortitude save to avoid becoming poisoned. The
level of a poison is the level of the monster inflicting the
poison. The poison follows the rules for afflictions found on
page 457 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook.
Push [one-action] Requirements The monster’s last action was a success
with a Strike that lists Push in its damage entry. Effect The
monster automatically knocks the target away from the
monster. Unless otherwise noted in the ability description,
the creature is pushed 5 feet. If the attack was a critical hit,
this distance is doubled.
Regeneration This monster regains the listed number of Hit
Points each round at the beginning of its turn. Its dying
condition never increases beyond dying 3 as long as its 
345

344
regeneration is active. However, if it takes damage of a type
listed in the regeneration entry, its regeneration deactivates
until the end of its next turn. Deactivate the regeneration
before applying any damage of a listed type, since that
damage might kill the monster by bringing it to dying 4.
Rend [one-action] A Rend entry lists a Strike the monster has.
Requirements The monster hit the same enemy with two
consecutive Strikes of the listed type in the same round.
Effect The monster automatically deals that Strike’s damage
again to the enemy.
Retributive Strike [reaction] Trigger An enemy damages the
monster’s ally, and both are within 15 feet of the monster.
Effect The ally gains resistance to all damage against the
triggering damage equal to 2 + the monster’s level. If the foe
is within reach, the monster makes a melee Strike against it.
Scent Scent involves sensing creatures or objects by smell, and
is usually a vague sense. The range is listed in the ability,
and it functions only if the creature or object being detected
emits an aroma (for instance, incorporeal creatures usually
do not exude an aroma).
If a creature emits a heavy aroma or is upwind, the GM
can double or even triple the range of scent abilities used to
detect that creature, and the GM can reduce the range if a
creature is downwind.
Shield Block [reaction] Trigger The monster has its shield raised and
takes damage from a physical attack. Effect The monster snaps
its shield into place to deflect a blow. The shield prevents the
monster from taking an amount of damage up to the shield’s
Hardness. The monster and the shield each take any remaining
damage, possibly breaking or destroying the shield.
Sneak Attack When the monster Strikes a creature that has
the flat-footed condition with an agile or finesse melee
weapon, an agile or finesse unarmed attack, or a ranged
weapon attack, it also deals the listed precision damage. For
a ranged attack with a thrown weapon, that weapon must
also be an agile or finesse weapon.
Swallow Whole [one-action] (attack) The monster attempts to swallow
a creature of the listed size or smaller that it has grabbed in
its jaws or mouth. If a swallowed creature is of the maximum
size listed, the monster can’t use Swallow Whole again.
If the creature is smaller than the maximum, the monster
can usually swallow more creatures; the GM determines
the maximum. The monster attempts an Athletics check
opposed by the grabbed creature’s Reflex DC. If it succeeds,
it swallows the creature. The monster’s mouth or jaws no
longer grab a creature it has swallowed, so the monster is
free to use them to Strike or Grab once again. The monster
can’t attack creatures it has swallowed.
A swallowed creature is grabbed, is slowed 1, and has to
hold its breath or start suffocating. The swallowed creature
takes the listed amount of damage when first swallowed and
at the end of each of its turns while it’s swallowed. If the victim
Escapes this ability’s grabbed condition, it exits through the
monster’s mouth. This frees any other creature grabbed in the
monster’s mouth or jaws. A swallowed creature can attack
the monster that has swallowed it, but only with unarmed
attacks or with weapons of light Bulk or less. The engulfing
creature is flat-footed against the attack. If the monster takes
piercing or slashing damage equaling or exceeding the listed
Rupture value from a single attack or spell, the engulfed
creature cuts itself free. A creature that gets free by either
Escaping or cutting itself free can immediately breathe and
exits the swallowing monster’s space.
If the monster dies, a swallowed creature can be freed by
creatures adjacent to the corpse if they spend a combined
total of 3 actions cutting the monster open with a weapon
or unarmed attack that deals piercing or slashing damage.
Swarm Mind This monster doesn’t have a single mind
(typically because it’s a swarm of smaller creatures), and is
immune to mental effects that target only a specific number
of creatures. It is still subject to mental effects that affect all
creatures in an area.
Telepathy (aura, divination, magical) A monster with telepathy
can communicate mentally with any creatures within the
listed radius, as long as they share a language. This doesn’t
give any special access to their thoughts, and communicates
no more information than normal speech would.
Throw Rock [one-action] The monster picks up a rock within reach or
retrieves a stowed rock and throws it, making a ranged Strike.
Trample[three-actions] The monster Strides up to double its Speed and
can move through the spaces of creatures of the listed size,
Trampling each creature whose space it enters. The monster
can attempt to Trample the same creature only once in a single
use of Trample. The monster deals the damage of the listed
Strike, but trampled creatures can attempt a basic Reflex
save at the listed DC (no damage on a critical success, half
damage on a success, double damage on a critical failure).
Tremorsense Tremorsense allows a monster to feel the
vibrations through a solid surface caused by movement. It is
an imprecise sense with a limited range (listed in the ability).
Tremorsense functions only if the monster is on the same
surface as the subject, and only if the subject is moving along
(or burrowing through) the surface.
Wavesense This sense allows a monster to feel vibrations caused
by movement through a liquid. It’s an imprecise sense with a
limited range (listed in the ability). Wavesense functions only
if monster and the subject are in the same body of liquid, and
only if the subject is moving through the liquid.
Creature Traits
Some of these traits appear in the Pathfinder Core
Rulebook, while others are new to this book.
Rarity Traits
Unless the creature is common, its trait list starts with a
rarity trait. Creatures that don’t start with a rarity trait
have the common rarity.
Common A creature of this rarity is generally known and can
be summoned with the appropriate summon spell.
Uncommon Less is known about uncommon creatures than
common creatures. They typically can’t be summoned. The
DC of Recall Knowledge checks related to this creature is
increased by 2.
Rare As the name suggests, these creatures are rare. They 
345

344
typically can’t be summoned. The DC of Recall Knowledge
checks related to this creature is increased by 5.
Unique A creature with this rarity is one of a kind. The DC
of Recall Knowledge checks related to this creature is
increased by 10.
Alignment Trait Abbreviation
Following any listed rarity trait is one of nine alignment
trait abbreviations. They are listed below with the
alignment traits that these abbreviations represent.
General descriptions of alignments are found on pages
28–29 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook.
CE Chaotic and evil
CG Chaotic and good
CN Chaotic and neutral
LG Lawful and good
LE Lawful and evil
LN Lawful and neutral
N Neutral
NE Neutral and evil
NG Neutral and good
Size
After any listed rarity trait and the alignment abbreviation,
each creature has its size listed before its traits.
Gargantuan This size of creature takes up a space of at least
20 feet by 20 feet (16 squares on the grid), but can be much
larger. Gargantuan creatures typically have a reach of 20
feet if they are tall, or 15 feet if they are long, but larger
ones could have a much longer reach.
Huge A Huge creature takes up a 15-foot-by-15-foot space
(9 squares on the grid). It typically has a reach of 15 feet if
the creature is tall or 10 feet if the creature is long.
Large A Large creature takes up a 10-foot-by-10-foot space
(4 squares on the grid). It typically has a reach of 10 feet if
the creature is tall or 5 feet if the creature is long.
Medium A Medium creature takes up a 5-foot-by-5-foot space
(1 square on the grid) and typically has a reach of 5 feet.
Small A Small creature takes up a 5-foot-by-5-foot space
(1 square on the grid) and typically has a reach of 5 feet.
Tiny A creature of this size takes up less than a 5-foot-by-5-
foot space (1 square on the grid), and multiple Tiny creatures
can occupy the same square on the grid. At least four Tiny
creatures can occupy the same square, and even more can
occupy the same square, at the GM’s discretion. They can
also occupy the same space as larger creatures, and if their
reach is 0 feet, they must do so in order to attack.
Other Traits
After any rarity traits, the alignment abbreviation, and
the size trait, each creature’s trait line lists all other traits
the creature has in alphabetical order. The following is a
list of those traits found in the book.
Aberration Aberrations are creatures from beyond the planes
or corruptions of the natural order.
Acid Effects with this trait deal acid damage. Creatures with
this trait have a magical connection to acid.
Aeon These monitors are the self-styled defenders of reality.
Traditional aeons have dualistic natures and forms, and
they hold a dichotomy of interests, though axiomites
and inevitables do not. Aeons other than axiomites
and inevitables communicate via a strange telepathic
hodgepodge of sensory sending called envisioning.
Air Effects with the air trait either manipulate or conjure air.
Those that manipulate air have no effect in a vacuum or in
areas without air. Creatures with this trait consist primarily
of air or have a magical connection to that element.
Amphibious An amphibious creature can breathe in water and
in air, even outside of its preferred environment, usually
indefinitely but at least for hours. These creatures often
have a swim Speed. Their bludgeoning and slashing unarmed
Strikes don’t take the usual –2 penalty for being underwater.
Angel This family of celestials is native to the plane of Nirvana.
Most angels are neutral good, have darkvision, and have a
weakness to evil damage.
Animal An animal is a creature with a relatively low
intelligence. It typically doesn’t have an Intelligence
modifier above –4, can’t speak languages, and can’t be
trained in Intelligence-based skills.
Aquatic Aquatic creatures are at home underwater. Their
bludgeoning and slashing unarmed Strikes don’t take the
usual –2 penalty for being underwater. Aquatic creatures
can breathe water but not air.
Archon Members of this family of celestials are the protectors
of Heaven and are lawful good. They have darkvision and a
weakness to evil damage.
Astral Astral creatures are native of the Astral Plane. They can
survive the basic environmental effects of the Astral Plane.
Azata This family of celestials is native to Elysium. They are
chaotic good and have darkvision and a weakness to evil
and cold iron.
Beast A creature similar to an animal but with an Intelligence
modifier of –3 or higher is usually a beast. Unlike an animal,
a beast might be able to speak and reason.
Boggard Boggards are frog-like humanoids. They typically
have darkvision.
Caligni These subterranean people have darkvision, and some
have powers to create darkness.
Catfolk Catfolk are humanoids with feline features.
Celestial Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection
to the good-aligned planes are called celestials. Celestials
WEAPON TRAITS
The creatures in this book use one new trait-brutal-
and list the finesse trait differently. The bonuses from
these traits are already included in creatures’ statistics,
but the traits are still shown because they’re relevant
for the clumsy and enfeebled conditions.
Brutal: A ranged attack with this trait uses its Strength
modifier instead of Dexterity on the attack roll.
Finesse: This melee attack is Dexterity-based. Even if a
weapon normally has the finesse trait, this trait is omitted
in the Strike entry if the monster is applying its Strength.
347

346
can survive the basic environmental effects of planes in the
Outer Sphere.
Changeling These humanoids are the children of hags
and members of other humanoid ancestries.
Cold Effects with this trait deal cold damage. Creatures with
this trait have a magical connection to cold.
Construct A construct is an artificial creature empowered
by a force other than necromancy. Constructs are often
mindless; they are immune to bleed damage, death effects,
disease, healing, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, poison,
and the doomed, drained, fatigued, paralyzed, sickened, and
unconscious conditions; and they may have Hardness based
on the materials used to construct their bodies. Constructs
are not living creatures, nor are they undead. When reduced
to 0 Hit Points, a construct creature is destroyed.
Daemon A family of fiends spawned on the desolate plane
of Abaddon, most daemons are neutral evil. They typically
have darkvision and weakness to good damage.
Demon A family of fiends hailing from the Abyss, most demons
are chaotic evil. Most demons have darkvision.
Dero This family of humanoids are the descendants of fey
creatures that fell into darkness and confusion after being
abandoned in the Darklands. They are immune to confusion
and vulnerable to sunlight.
Devil A family of fiends from Hell, most devils are lawful evil.
They typically have greater darkvision, immunity to fire,
and telepathy.
Dhampir These humanoids are the immortal offspring
of vampires and members of other ancestries.
Dinosaur These reptiles have survived from prehistoric times.
Dragon Dragons are reptilian creatures, often winged or with
the power of flight. Most are able to use a breath weapon
and are immune to sleep and the paralyzed condition.
Drow Subterranean kin of the elves, drow typically have
darkvision and inborn magical abilities.
Duergar Subterranean kin of the dwarves, duergars typically
have darkvision and immunity to poison. They are not easily
fooled by illusions.
Earth Effects with the earth trait either manipulate or conjure
earth. Those that manipulate earth have no effect in an area
without earth. Creatures with this trait consist primarily of
earth or have a magical connection to that element.
Electricity Effects with this trait deal electricity damage.
A creature with this trait has a magical connection
to electricity.
Elemental Elementals are creatures directly tied to an element
and are native to the Elemental Planes. Elementals don’t
need to breathe.
Elf A creature with this trait is a member of the elf ancestry.
Elves are mysterious people with rich traditions of magic
and scholarship who typically have low-light vision. An
ability with this trait can be used or selected only by elves.
A weapon with this trait is created and used by elves.
Ethereal Ethereal creatures are natives of the Ethereal Plane.
They can survive the basic environmental effects of the
Ethereal Plane.
Fey Creatures of the First World are called the fey.
Fiend Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection to the
evil-aligned planes are called fiends. Fiends can survive the
basic environmental effects of planes in the Outer Sphere.
Fire Effects with the fire trait deal fire damage or either
conjure or manipulate fire. Those that manipulate fire have
no effect in an area without fire. Creatures with this trait are
primarily constituted of fire or have a magical connection to
that element.
Fungus Fungal creatures have the fungus trait. They are
distinct from normal fungi.
Genie The diverse families of genies hold positions of
prominence on the Elemental Planes. They have powerful
magical abilities.
Ghost Lost souls that haunt the world as incorporeal undead
are called ghosts.
Ghoul Ghouls are vile undead creatures that feast on flesh.
Giant Giants are massive humanoid creatures.
Gnoll Gnolls are humanoids that resemble hyenas.
Goblin A creature with this trait can come from multiple
groups of creatures, including goblins, hobgoblins, and
bugbears. Goblins tend to have darkvision. An ability with
this trait can be used or chosen only by goblins. A weapon
with this trait is created and used by goblins.
Golem Golems are a special type of construct. Golems are
immune to almost all magic, but most have a weakness to
certain spells.
Gremlin Cruel and mischievous fey, gremlins have acclimated
to life on the Material Plane.
Hag These creatures are malevolent spellcasters who form covens.
Halfling A creature with this trait is a member of the halfling
ancestry. These small people are friendly wanderers
considered to be lucky. An ability with this trait can be used
or selected only by halflings. A weapon with this trait is
created and used by halflings.
Human A creature with this trait is a member of the human
ancestry. Humans are a diverse array of people known for
their adaptability. An ability with this trait can be used or
selected only by humans.
Humanoid Humanoid creatures reason and act much like
humans. They typically stand upright and have two arms
and two legs.
Incorporeal An incorporeal creature or object has no physical
form. It can pass through solid objects, including walls. When
inside an object, an incorporeal creature can’t perceive,
attack, or interact with anything outside the object, and
if it starts its turn in an object, it is slowed 1. Corporeal
creatures can pass through an incorporeal creature, but
they can’t end their movement in its space.
An incorporeal creature can’t attempt Strength-based
checks against physical creatures or objects-only against
incorporeal ones-unless those objects have the ghost touch
property rune. Likewise, a corporeal creature can’t attempt
Strength-based checks against incorporeal creatures
or objects.
Incorporeal creatures usually have immunity to effects
or conditions that require a physical body, like disease,
poison, and precision damage. They usually have resistance 
347
346
against all damage (except force damage and damage from
Strikes with the ghost touch property rune), with double
the resistance against non-magical damage.
Inevitable These constructed aeons were created by the
axiomites. Each type of inevitable is dedicated to a specific
task. Most inevitables have weakness to chaotic damage.
Kobold Kobolds are reptilian humanoids who are usually Small
and typically have darkvision.
Leshy Leshys are small plant creatures, roughly humanoid
in form.
Lizardfolk Lizardfolk are a family of reptilian humanoids.
Magical Something with the magical trait is imbued with
magical energies not tied to a specific tradition of magic.
A magical item radiates a magic aura infused with its
dominant school of magic.
Some items or effects are closely tied to a particular
tradition of magic. In these cases, the item has the arcane,
divine, occult, or primal trait instead of the magical trait.
Any of these traits indicate that the item is magical.
Merfolk These aquatic humanoids have an upper body similar
to a human and a lower body similar to a fish.
Mindless A mindless creature has either programmed or
rudimentary mental attributes. Most, if not all, of their mental
ability modifiers are –5. They are immune to all mental effects.
Monitor Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection
to the neutrally aligned planes are called monitors. Monitors
can survive the basic environmental effects of planes in the
Outer Sphere.
Mummy A mummy is an undead creature created from a
preserved corpse.
Mutant The monster has mutated or evolved, granting it
unusual benefits, drawbacks, or both.
Nymph This family of beautiful fey creatures has strong ties
to natural locations.
Ooze Oozes are creatures with simple anatomies. They tend
to have low mental ability scores and immunity to mental
effects and precision damage.
Orc A creature with this trait is a member of the orc ancestry.
These green-skinned people tend to have darkvision. An
ability with this trait can be used or selected only by orcs.
An item with this trait is created and used by orcs.
Plant Vegetable creatures have the plant trait. They are
distinct from normal plants. Magical effects with this trait
manipulate or conjure plants or plant matter in some way.
Those that manipulate plants have no effect in an area with
no plants.
Protean A family of monitors spawned within the Maelstrom,
these creatures are guardians of disorder and are chaotic
neutral. They typically have darkvision, an amorphous
anatomy, and a weakness to lawful damage.
Psychopomp A family of monitors spawned within the Boneyard
to convey souls to the Outer Planes, most psychopomps are
true neutral. They typically have darkvision, lifesense, and
spirit touch, and they are immune to death effects.
Rakshasa Reincarnations of evil souls, rakshasas are fiends
that live on the Material Plane.
Ratfolk Ratfolk are humanoids who resemble rats.
Sea Devil Evil ocean-dwelling humanoids, sea devils usually
have darkvision and wavesense.
Skeleton This undead is made by animating a dead creature’s
skeleton with negative energy.
Soulbound These constructs are mentally augmented by a
fragment of a once-living creature’s soul.
Spirit Spirits are ephemeral creatures defined by their spiritual
essence. They often lack a material form.
Sprite A family of diminutive winged fey with a strong
connection to primal magic.
Swarm A swarm is a mass or cloud of creatures that functions
as one monster. Its size entry gives the size of the entire
mass, though for most swarms the individual creatures that
make up that mass are Tiny. A swarm can occupy the same
space as other creatures, and must do so in order to use
its damaging action. A swarm typically has weakness to
effects that deal damage over an area (like area spells and
splash weapons).
Tengu Tengu are humanoids who resemble birds.
Troll Trolls are giant, brutish creatures and are well known for
their ability to regenerate.
Undead Once living, these creatures were infused after death
with negative energy and soul-corrupting evil magic. When
reduced to 0 Hit Points, an undead creature is destroyed.
Undead creatures are damaged by positive energy, are healed
by negative energy, and don’t benefit from healing effects.
Vampire Undead creatures who thirst for blood, vampires are
notoriously versatile and hard to destroy.
Water Effects with the water trait either manipulate or
conjure water. Those that manipulate water have no effect
in an area without water. Creatures with this trait are
primarily constituted of water or have a magical connection
to the element.
Werecreature These shapechanging creatures either are
naturally able to shift between animal, humanoid, and
hybrid forms or are afflicted with a curse that forces them
to shift involuntarily.
Xulgath These subterranean reptilian creatures tend to have
darkvision and smell awful.
Zombie These undead are mindless rotting corpses that
hunger for living flesh.
New Rituals
Some creatures from the Outer Planes can use special
rituals to call their kin or transport themselves to another
plane. These are the rituals used by angels, demons,
and devils.
ABYSSAL PACT RITUAL 1
UNCOMMON CONJURATION
Cast 1 day
Primary Check Religion (expert; you must be a demon)
You call in a favor from another demon whose level is no more
than double Abyssal pact’s spell level, two demons whose
levels are each at least 2 less than double the spell level,
or three demons whose levels are each at least 3 less than
double the spell level.
349

348
Critical Success You conjure the demon or demons. They are
eager to pursue the task, so they don’t ask for a favor.
Success You conjure the demon or demons. They are not eager
to pursue the task, so they require a favor in return.
Failure You don’t conjure any demons.
Critical Failure The demon or demons are angry that
you disturbed them. They appear before you, but they
immediately attack you.
ANGELIC MESSENGER RITUAL 1
UNCOMMON CONJURATION
Cast 1 day
Primary Check Religion (expert; you must be an angel)
You transport yourself to either a celestial plane or a world
on the Material Plane where worshippers of your patron can
be found. You must be of no higher level than double angelic
messenger’s spell level.
Critical Success As success, but if you’ve never visited that
plane or world before, you appear right in front of the
message’s intended recipient.
Success You arrive on the target plane or world at the last
location you visited on that plane or world, or to a random
location within 10d10 miles of your message’s intended
recipient if you’ve never visited that plane or world before.
Failure You don’t travel.
Critical Failure You accidentally travel to the wrong plane,
possibly a dangerous plane.
INFERNAL PACT RITUAL 1
UNCOMMON CONJURATION
Cast 1 day
Primary Check Religion (expert; you must be a devil)
You make an appeal to a powerful devil, asking it to bind some
of its subordinates to your service. If you succeed, the devil
sends you its choice of one devil whose level is no more than
double infernal pact’s level, two devils whose levels are each at
least 2 less than double the spell level, or three devils whose
levels are each at least 3 less than double the spell level.
Critical Success The devils are sent to you and serve you
for 1d4 weeks.
Success The devils are sent to you and serve you for 1d4 days.
Failure Your request is denied.
Critical Failure Not only is your request denied, but the
powerful devil sends word of its displeasure to your master.
New Languages
Some creatures in this book speak languages not found on
page 65 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook. The languages
are listed below.
TABLE: UNCOMMON LANGUAGES
Language Speakers
Alghollthu Alghollthus and their thralls
Amurrun Catfolk
Arboreal Arboreals and other plant creatures
Boggard Boggards
Caligni Calignis
Cyclops Cyclops
Daemonic Daemons
Iruxi Lizardfolk
Protean Proteans
Requian Psychopomps
Sphinx Sphinxes
Utopian Axiomites and inevitables
Creatures by Type
The following lists organize the creatures by their most
important type, subdivided by level. A superscript “U”
indicates that a creature is uncommon, “R” that it’s rare,
and “Uq” that it’s unique.
Aberration
Level 1 reefclaw; Level 2 sinspawn; Level 3 grothlut, rust
monster, web lurker; Level 4 faceless stalker, mimic, otyugh;
Level 5 cloaker, gibbering mouther; Level 6 drider, will-o’-wisp;
Level 7 alghollthu masterU, chuul, dark nagaU; Level 8 brain
collectorU; Level 10 guardian nagaU, gug, nilith, ofalth, roperU;
Level 12 gogiteth; Level 14 grikkitog, veiled masterR; Level 15
quelaunt; Level 18 shoggothR; Level 20 baomal
Animal
Level –1 bloodseeker, eagle, flash beetle, giant centipede,
giant rat, guard dog, viper; Level 0, riding pony, spider swarm;
Level 1 ball python, electric eel, giant gecko, goblin dog, hunting
spider, hyena, rat swarm, riding dog, riding horse, vampire bat
swarm, velociraptor, war pony, wolf; Level 2 boar, crocodile,
deinonychus, giant bat, giant monitor lizard, giant viper,
leopard, pteranodon, slurk, war horse; Level 3 ankhrav, bunyip,
centipede swarm, dire wolf, giant mantis, giant scorpion, giant
wasp, gorilla, grizzly bear, hyaenodon, lion; Level 4 daeodon,
giant stag beetle, great white shark, griffon, scorpion swarm,
tiger, wasp swarm; Level 5 giant moray eel, giant frilled lizard;
Level 6 ankylosaurus, cave bear, giant tarantula, smilodon;
Level 7 elephant, quetzalcoatlus, stegosaurus; Level 8
bulette, giant anaconda, giant octopus, hive motherU, krooth,
megaprimatus, triceratops; Level 9 deinosuchus, megalodonU,
roc; Level 10 brontosaurus, mammoth, tyrannosaurus; Level 11
deadly mantis, goliath spider; Level 12 sea serpentU; Level 13
purple worm; Level 15 azure wormU
Astral
Level 12 shining child
Beast
Level 2 warg; Level 3 centaur, cockatrice, giant eagle, pegasus;
Level 4 gargoyle, owlbear, porachaU; Level 5 basilisk, ether
spider, winter wolf; Level 6 hydra, lamia, manticore; Level 7
remorhazU; Level 8 chimeraU, lamia matriarch, sphinx; Level
12 cauthooj, shulnR; Level 15 mukradi, phoenixR; Level 17
wendigoU; Level 18 crimson wormR, krakenU, simurghR
Celestial
Level 1 cassisian, lantern archon, lyrakien; Level 4 gancanagh,
horned archon; Level 6 choral; Level 7 legion archon, lillend;
349
348
Level 8 balisse; Level 10 shield archon; Level 13 ghaele;
Level 14 astral deva
Construct
Level –1 animated broom; Level 0 homunculus; Level 2
animated armor, soulbound doll; Level 3 animated statue;
Level 7 giant animated statue; Level 8 flesh golemU;
Level  9 alchemical golemU; Level 10 clay golemU; Level 11
stone  golemU; Level 13 iron golemU; Level 18 adamantine
golemR; Level 19 guthallathR
Dragon
Level 2 faerie dragonU; Level 3 river drake; Level 5 flame
drake; Level 6 jungle drake, wyvern, young white dragon;
Level 7 frost drake, young black dragon, young brass dragon;
Level 8 desert drake, young copper dragon, young green
dragon; Level 9, dragon turtle, young blue dragon, young
bronze dragon; Level 10 adult white dragon, young red dragon,
young silver dragon; Level 11 adult black dragon, adult brass
dragon, young gold dragon; Level 12 adult copper dragon, adult
green dragon; Level 13 adult blue dragon, adult bronze dragon;
Level 14 adult red dragon, adult silver dragon, crag linnormU;
Level 15 adult gold dragon, ancient white dragonU; Level 16
ancient black dragonU, ancient brass dragonU; Level 17 ancient
copper dragonU, ancient green dragonU, ice linnormU; Level 18
ancient blue dragonU, ancient bronze dragonU; Level 19 ancient
red dragonU, ancient silver dragonU; Level 20 ancient gold
dragonU, tarn linnormU; Level 21 tor linnormU
Elemental
Level 1 air mephit, earth mephit, fire mephit, water mephit;
Level 3, brine shark, cinder rat, sod hound, zephyr hawk;
Level 4 janni; Level 5 living landslide, living waterfall, living
whirlwind, living wildfire, djinniU; Level 7 invisible stalker,
quatoid, salamander, shaitanU, xorn; Level 9 efreetiU, firewyrm,
maridU, stone mauler, storm lord, tidal master; Level 11
elemental avalanche, elemental hurricane, elemental inferno,
elemental tsunami; Level 14 uthul; Level 16 zaramuun
Ethereal
Level 5 ether spider
Fey
Level –1 mitflit, sprite; Level 0 pugwampi; Level 1 grig,
jinkin, naiad; Level 3 dryad, unicorn; Level 4 pixie, satyr;
Level 5 redcap; Level 6 elananx; Level 7 naiad queenU; Level 12
gimmerlingU; Level 13 dryad queenU
Fiend
Level 0 lemure; Level 1 cacodaemon, imp, quasit; Level 3
hell hound; Level 4 barghest; Level 5 barbazu, dandasuka;
Level 6 ceustodaemon, nightmare; Level 7 greater barghestU,
succubus; Level 8 erinys; Level 9 leukodaemon, nessian
warhound, night hag, vrock; Level 10 phistophilus, raja
rakshasa; Level  11 greater nightmare; Level 13 glabrezu,
gelugon; Level 16 astradaemon, shemhazian; Level 17 marilith;
Level 20, balor, pit fiend; Level 25 TreerazerUq
Fungus
Level 9 drakauthix; Level 19 terotricusR; Level 21 mu spore
Giant
Level 3 ogre warrior; Level 4 ogre glutton; Level 5 cyclopsU,
troll; Level 6 ettin; Level 7 hill giant, ogre boss; Level 8
stone giant; Level 9 frost giant; Level 10 fire giant, troll king;
Level 11 cloud giant; Level 12 great cyclopsU; Level 13 storm
giant; Level 16 rune giantU
Humanoid
Level –1 goblin warrior, kobold warrior; Level 0 duergar
sharpshooter, orc brute; Level 1 boggard scout, caligni dancer,
catfolk pouncer, deep gnome scout, drow fighter, duergar
bombardier, goblin commando, goblin pyro, goblin war chanter,
hobgoblin soldier, kobold scout, lizardfolk defender, lizardfolk
scout, merfolk warrior, orc warrior, xulgath warrior; Level 2
boggard warrior, bugbear thug, caligni creeper, deep gnome
warrior, dero stalker, dhampir wizard, drow rogue, duergar
taskmaster, gnoll hunter, kobold dragon mage, lizardfolk
stargazer, merfolk wavecaller, orc warchief, sea devil scout,
tengu, wererat, xulgath skulker; Level 3 boggard swampseer,
bugbear tormentor, dero strangler, doppelgangerU, dream
may exile, drow priestess, gnoll cultist, sea hag, tiefling adept,
werewolf, xulgath leader; Level 4 caligni stalker, duskwalker
ghost hunter, gnoll sergeant, green hag, hobgoblin archer,
minotaur, ratfolk grenadier, sea devil brute, werebearU; Level 5
aasimar redeemer, deep gnome rockwarden, dero magisterU,
harpy, yetiU; Level 6 annis hag, hobgoblin general, sea devil
baron; Level 7 medusa
Monitor
Level 1 arbiter, nosoi, voidworm; Level 7 naunet; Level 8
axiomite; Level 12 kolyarut; Level 15 morrigna; Level 17 keketar;
Level 20 pleroma
Ooze
Level 1 sewer ooze; Level 3 gelatinous cube; Level 5 ochre jelly;
Level 7 black pudding
Plant
Level 0 leaf leshy; Level 1 gourd leshy; Level 2 fungus leshy;
Level 3 snapping flytrap; Level 4 arboreal warden; Level 6
awakened tree, shambler; Level 8 arboreal regent; Level 10
dezullon, giant flytrap; Level 15 wemmuth
Undead
Level –1 skeleton guard, zombie shambler; Level  1
ghoul, plague zombie; Level 2 ghast, skeletal champion,
skeletal horse, zombie brute; Level 3 skeletal giant, wight;
Level 4 ghost commoner, shadow, vampire spawn rogue;
Level  5 poltergeist; Level 6 mummy guardian, vampire
count, wraith, zombie hulk; Level 7 dullahanU, skeletal hulk;
Level 9 mummy pharaohR, vampire mastermindU; Level 10
ghost mage, graveknight; Level 12 lichR; Level 15 demilichR;
Level 16 lesser deathR, warswornU; Level 17 bansheeU; Level
18 skulltakerU; Level 21 Grim ReaperUq
351

350
Creature Level Category Type Trait Rarity Page
Animated broom –1 Animated object Construct Common 20
Bloodseeker –1 Bloodseeker Animal Common 42
Eagle –1 Eagle Animal Common 141
Flash beetle –1 Beetle Animal Common 41
Giant centipede –1 Centipede Animal Common 61
Giant rat –1 Rat Animal Common 276
Goblin warrior –1 Goblin Humanoid Common 180
Guard dog –1 Dog Animal Common 102
Kobold warrior –1 Kobold Humanoid Common 212
Mitflit –1 Gremlin Fey Common 192
Skeleton guard –1 Skeleton Undead Common 298
Sprite –1 Sprite Fey Common 308
Viper –1 Snake Animal Common 302
Zombie shambler –1 Zombie Undead Common 340
Duergar sharpshooter 0 Duergar Humanoid Common 138
Homunculus 0 Homunculus Construct Common 208
Leaf leshy 0 Leshy Plant Common 218
Lemure 0 Devil Fiend Common 86
Orc brute 0 Orc Humanoid Common 256
Pugwampi 0 Gremlin Fey Common 193
Riding pony 0 Horse Animal Common 209
Spider swarm 0 Spider Animal Common 306
Arbiter 1 Aeon Monitor Common 8
Air mephit 1 Elemental, mephit Elemental Common 150
Ball python 1 Snake Animal Common 302
Boggard scout 1 Boggard Humanoid Common 44
Cacodaemon 1 Daemon Fiend Common 70
Caligni dancer 1 Caligni Humanoid Common 50
Cassisian 1 Angel Celestial Common 16
Catfolk pouncer 1 Catfolk Humanoid Common 54
Deep gnome scout 1 Deep gnome Humanoid Common 74
Drow fighter 1 Drow Humanoid Common 136
Duergar bombardier 1 Duergar Humanoid Common 138
Earth mephit 1 Elemental, mephit Elemental Common 150
Electric eel 1 Eel Animal Common 142
Fire mephit 1 Elemental, mephit Elemental Common 150
Ghoul 1 Ghoul Undead Common 169
Giant gecko 1 Lizard Animal Common 228
Goblin commando 1 Goblin Humanoid Common 180
Goblin dog 1 Goblin dog Animal Common 182
Goblin pyro 1 Goblin Humanoid Common 181
Goblin war chanter 1 Goblin Humanoid Common 181
Gourd leshy 1 Leshy Plant Common 218
Grig 1 Sprite Fey Common 308
Hobgoblin soldier 1 Hobgoblin Humanoid Common 206
Hunting spider 1 Spider Animal Common 306
Hyena 1 Hyena Animal Common 211
Imp 1 Devil Fiend Common 87
Jinkin 1 Gremlin Fey Common 193
Kobold scout 1 Kobold Humanoid Common 213
Lantern archon 1 Archon Celestial Common 26
Creatures by Level
The following tables present every single stat block in the
Bestiary organized by level. Each entry also details the
creature’s category, showing under which entry it can be
found and the general group it belongs to, its type trait,
which is useful for summoning and some other abilities,
along with the creature’s rarity and page number. 
351
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
350
Lizardfolk defender
1 Lizardfolk Humanoid Common 230
Lizardfolk scout
1 Lizardfolk Humanoid Common 231
Lyrakien
1 Azata Celestial Common 30
Merfolk warrior
1 Merfolk Humanoid Common 235
Naiad
1 Nymph
Fey Common 246
Nosoi
1 Psychopomp Monitor Common 270
Orc warrior
1 Or
c Humanoid Common 25
7
Plague zombie
1 Zombie Undead Common 340
Quasit
1 Demon Fiend Common 76
Rat swarm
1 Ra
t Animal Common 276
Reefclaw
1 Reefclaw Aberration Common 279
Riding dog
1 Dog Animal Common 102
Riding horse
1 Horse Animal Common 209
Sewer ooze
1 Ooze Ooze Common 254
Vampire bat swarm
1 Ba
t Animal Common 39
Velociraptor
1 Dinosaur Animal Common 96
Voidworm
1 Protean Monitor Common 266
War pony
1 Horse Animal Common 209
Water mephit
1 Elemental, mephit Elemental Common 15
1
Wolf
1
Wolf Animal Common 334
Xulgath warrior
1 Xulgath Humanoid Common 336
Animated armor
2 Animated object Construct Common 20
Boar
2 Boar Animal Common 43
Boggard warrior
2 Boggar
d Humanoid Common
4
4
Bugbear thug
2 Bugbear Humanoid Common
47
Caligni creeper
2 Caligni Humanoid Common 50
Crocodile
2 Crocodile Animal Common 67
Deep gnome warrior
2 Deep Gnome Humanoid Common 75
Deinonychus
2 Dinosaur Animal Common 96
Dero stalker
2 Der
o Humanoid Common 84
Dhampir wizard
2 Dhampir Humanoid Common 95
Drow rogue
2 Drow Humanoid Common 137
Duergar taskmaster
2 Duergar Humanoid Common 139
Faerie dragon
2
Faerie dragon Dragon Uncommon 15
7
Fungus leshy
2
Leshy Plant Common 219
Ghast
2 Ghoul Undead Common 169
Giant bat
2 Ba
t Animal Common 39
Giant Monitor lizard
2 Lizar
d Animal Common 228
Giant viper
2 Snake Animal Common 303
Gnoll hunter
2 Gnoll Humanoid Common 178
Kobold dragon mage
2
Kobold Humanoid Common 213
Leopard
2 Ca
t Animal Common 52
Lizardfolk stargazer
2 Lizardfolk Humanoid Common 231
Merfolk wavecaller
2 Merfolk Humanoid Common 235
Orc warchief
2 Or
c Humanoid Common 25
7
Pteranodon
2 Pterosaur Animal Common 272
Sea devil scout
2 Sea devil Humanoid Common 286
Sinspawn
2 Sinspawn Aberration Common 296
Skeletal champion
2 Skeleton Undead Common 298
Skeletal horse
2 Skeleton Undead Common 299
Slurk
2 Slurk Animal Common 301
Soulbound doll
2 Soulbound doll Construct Common 304
Tengu
2
Tengu Humanoid Common 310
War horse
2 Horse Animal Common 209
Warg
2
Warg Beast Common 322
Wererat
2 Werecreature Humanoid Common 329
Xulgath skulker
2 Xulgath Humanoid Common 337
353
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
352
Zombie brute
2 Zombie Undead Common 341
Animated statue
3 Animated object Construct Common 21
Ankhrav
3 Ankhrav Animal Common 22
Boggard swampseer
3 Boggar
d Humanoid Common 45
Brine shark
3 Elemental, water Elemental Common 152
Bugbear tormentor
3 Bugbear Humanoid Common
47
Bunyip
3 Bunyip Animal Common 49
Centaur
3 Centaur Beast Common 60
Centipede swarm
3 Centipede Animal Common 61
Changeling exile
3 Changeling Humanoid Common 62
Cinder rat
3 Elemental, fir
e Elemental Common 148
Cockatrice
3 Cockatrice Beast Common 66
Dero strangler
3 Der
o Humanoid Common 84
Dire wolf
3
Wolf Animal Common 334
Doppelganger
3 Doppelganger Humanoid Uncommon 103
Drow priestess
3 Drow Humanoid Common 137
Dryad
3 Nymph
Fey Common 246
Gelatinous cube
3 Ooze Ooze Common 254
Giant eagle
3 Eagle Beast Common 141
Giant mantis
3 Mantis Animal Common 233
Giant scorpion
3 Scorpion Animal Common 285
Giant wasp
3
Wasp Animal Common 32
4
Gnoll cultist
3 Gnoll Humanoid Common 179
Gorilla
3 Ape Animal Common 23
Grizzly bear
3 Bear Animal Common 40
Grothlut
3 Fleshwarp Aberration Common 158
Hell hound
3 Hell hound Fiend Common 205
Hyaenodon
3 Hyena Animal Common 211
Lion
3 Ca
t Animal Common 52
Ogre warrior
3 Ogr
e Giant Common 252
Pegasus
3 Pegasus Beast Common 260
River drake
3 Drake Dragon Common 131
Rust monster
3 Rust monster Aberration Common 283
Sea hag
3 Hag Humanoid Common 200
Skeletal giant
3 Skeleton Undead Common 299
Snapping flytrap
3 Flytrap Plant Common 160
Sod hound
3 Elemental, earth Elemental Common 146
Tiefling adept
3 Planar scion Humanoid Common 262
Unicorn
3 Unicorn
Fey Common 316
Web lurker
3
Web lurker Aberration Common 325
Werewolf
3 Werecreature Humanoid Common 330
Wight
3 Wight Undead Common 332
Xulgath leader
3 Xulgath Humanoid Common 337
Zephyr hawk
3 Elemental, air Elemental Common 14
4
Arboreal warden
4 Arboreal Plant Common
2
4
Barghest
4 Barghest Fiend Common 36
Caligni stalker
4 Caligni Humanoid Common
5
1
Daeodon
4 Boar Animal Common 43
Duskwalker ghost hunter
4 Planar scion Humanoid Common 262
Faceless stalker
4 Alghollthu Aberration Common 13
Gancanagh
4 Azata Celestial Common 31
Gargoyle
4 Gargoyle Beast Common 161
Ghost commoner
4 Ghost Undead Common 167
Giant stag beetle
4 Beetle Animal Common 41
Gnoll sergeant
4 Gnoll Humanoid Common 179
Great white shark
4 Shark Animal Common 291
Green hag
4 Hag Humanoid Common 201
353
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
352
Griffon
4 Griffon Animal Common 194
Hobgoblin archer
4 Hobgoblin Humanoid Common 207
Horned archon
4 Archon Celestial Common 27
Janni
4 Genie Elemental Common 162
Mimic
4 Mimic Aberration Common 236
Minotaur
4 Minotaur Humanoid Common 237
Ogre glutton
4 Ogr
e Giant Common 252
Otyugh
4 Otyugh Aberration Common 258
Owlbear
4 Owlbear Beast Common 259
Pixie
4 Sprite
Fey Common 310
Poracha
4
Poracha Beast Uncommon 265
Ratfolk grenadier
4 Ratfolk Humanoid Common 27
7
Satyr
4 Satyr
Fey Common 284
Scorpion swarm
4 Scorpion Animal Common 285
Sea devil brute
4 Sea devil Humanoid Common 287
Shadow
4 Shadow Undead Common 289
Tiger
4 Ca
t Animal Common 52
Vampire spawn rogue
4
Vampire Undead Common 320
Wasp swarm
4
Wasp Animal Common 32
4
Werebear
4 Werecreature Humanoid Uncommon 330
Aasimar redeemer
5 Planar scion Humanoid Common 263
Barbazu
5 Devil Fiend Common 88
Basilisk
5 Basilisk Beast Common 38
Cloaker
5 Cloaker Aberration Common 65
Cyclops
5
Cyclops Giant Uncommon 68
Dandasuka
5 Rakshasa Fiend Common 274
Deep gnome rockwarden
5 Deep gnome Humanoid Common 75
Dero magister
5 Der
o Humanoid Uncommon 85
Djinni
5 Genie Elemental Uncommon 163
Ether spider
5 Ether spider Ethereal Common 155
Flame drake
5 Drake Dragon Common 131
Giant frilled lizard
5 Lizar
d Animal Common 229
Giant moray eel
5 Eel Animal Common 142
Gibbering mouther
5 Gibbering mouther Aberration Common 176
Harpy
5 Harp
y Humanoid Common 204
Living landslide
5 Elemental, earth Elemental Common 146
Living waterfall
5 Elemental, water Elemental Common 152
Living whirlwind
5 Elemental, air Elemental Common 14
4
Living wildfire
5 Elemental, fir
e Elemental Common 148
Ochre jelly
5 Ooze Ooze Common 254
Poltergeist
5 Poltergeist Undead Common 264
Redcap
5
Redcap
Fey Common 278
Troll
5
Troll Giant Common 314
Winter wolf
5
Warg Beast Common 322
Yeti
5
Yeti Humanoid Uncommon 338
Awakened tree
6 Arboreal Plant Common 25
Ankylosaurus
6 Dinosaur Animal Common 97
Annis hag
6 Hag Humanoid Common 201
Cave bear
6 Bear Animal Common 40
Ceustodaemon
6 Daemon Fiend Common 71
Choral
6 Angel Celestial Common 16
Drider
6 Fleshwarp Aberration Common 159
Elananx
6 Elananx
Fey Common 143
Ettin
6 Ettin Giant Common 156
Giant tarantula
6 Spider Animal Common 307
Hobgoblin general
6 Hobgoblin Humanoid Common 207
Hydra
6 Hydra Beast Common 210
355

354
Jungle drake 6 Drake Dragon Common 132
Lamia 6 Lamia Beast Common 216
Manticore 6 Manticore Beast Common 232
Mummy guardian 6 Mummy Undead Common 240
Nightmare 6 Nightmare Fiend Common 244
Sea devil baron 6 Sea devil Humanoid Common 287
Shambler 6 Shambler Plant Common 290
Smilodon 6 Cat Animal Common 53
Vampire count 6 Vampire Undead Common 320
Will-o’-wisp 6 Will-o’-wisp Aberration Common 333
Wraith 6 Wraith Undead Common 335
Wyvern 6 Drake Dragon Common 133
Young white dragon 6 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 113
Zombie hulk 6 Zombie Undead Common 341
Alghollthu master 7 Alghollthu Aberration Uncommon 14
Black pudding 7 Ooze Ooze Common 255
Chuul 7 Chuul Aberration Common 64
Dark naga 7 Naga Aberration Uncommon 242
Dullahan 7 Dullahan Undead Uncommon 140
Elephant 7 Elephant Animal Common 154
Frost drake 7 Drake Dragon Common 134
Giant animated statue 7 Animated object Construct Common 21
Greater barghest 7 Barghest Fiend Uncommon 36
Hill giant 7 Giant Giant Common 170
Invisible stalker 7 Elemental, air Elemental Common 144
Legion archon 7 Archon Celestial Common 28
Lillend 7 Azata Celestial Common 32
Medusa 7 Medusa Humanoid Common 234
Naiad queen 7 Nymph Fey Uncommon 248
Naunet 7 Protean Monitor Common 267
Ogre boss 7 Ogre Giant Common 253
Quatoid 7 Elemental, water Elemental Common 152
Quetzalcoatlus 7 Pterosaur Animal Common 272
Remorhaz 7 Remorhaz Beast Uncommon 280
Salamander 7 Elemental, fire Elemental Common 148
Shaitan 7 Genie Elemental Uncommon 163
Skeletal hulk 7 Skeleton Undead Common 299
Stegosaurus 7 Dinosaur Animal Common 98
Succubus 7 Demon Fiend Common 77
Xorn 7 Elemental, earth Elemental Common 146
Young black dragon 7 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 105
Young brass dragon 7 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 117
Axiomite 8 Aeon Monitor Common 9
Arboreal regent 8 Arboreal Plant Common 25
Balisse 8 Angel Celestial Common 18
Brain collector 8 Brain collector Aberration Uncommon 46
Bulette 8 Bulette Animal Common 48
Chimera 8 Chimera Beast Uncommon 63
Desert drake 8 Drake Dragon Common 135
Erinys 8 Devil Fiend Common 89
Flesh golem 8 Golem Construct Uncommon 184
Giant anaconda 8 Snake Animal Common 303
Giant octopus 8 Octopus, giant Animal Common 250
Hive mother 8 Ankhrav Animal Uncommon 22
Krooth 8 Krooth Animal Common 215
Lamia matriarch 8 Lamia Beast Common 217
Megaprimatus 8 Ape Animal Common 23
355
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
354
Sphinx
8 Sphinx Beast Common 305
Stone giant
8 Giant Giant Common 170
Triceratops
8 Dinosaur Animal Common 98
Young copper dragon
8 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 121
Young green dragon
8 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 109
Alchemical golem
9 Golem Construct Uncommon 185
Deinosuchus
9 Crocodile Animal Common 67
Dragon turtle
9 Dragon turtle Dragon Common 128
Drakauthix
9 Drakauthix Fungus Common 129
Efreeti
9 Genie Elemental Uncommon 164
Firewyrm
9 Elemental, fir
e Elemental Common 149
Frost giant
9 Giant Giant Common 171
Leukodaemon
9 Daemon Fiend Common 71
Marid
9 Genie Elemental Uncommon 165
Megalodon
9 Shark Animal Uncommon 291
Mummy pharaoh
9 Mummy Undead Rar
e
240
Nessian warhound
9 Hell hound Fiend Common 205
Night hag
9 Hag Fiend Common 202
Roc
9
Roc Animal Common 281
Stone mauler
9 Elemental, earth Elemental Common 147
Storm lord
9 Elemental, air Elemental Common 145
Tidal master
9 Elemental, water Elemental Common 153
Vampire mastermind
9
Vampire Undead Uncommon 321
Vrock
9 Demon Fiend Common 78
Young blue dragon
9 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 107
Young bronze dragon
9 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 119
Adult white dragon 10 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 114
Brontosaurus 10 Dinosaur Animal Common 99
Clay golem 10 Golem Construct Uncommon 186
Phistophilus 10 Devil Fiend Common 89
Dezullon 10 Dezullon Plant Common 94
Fire giant 10 Giant Giant Common 172
Ghost mage 10 Ghost Undead Common 167
Giant flytrap 10 Flytrap Plant Common 160
Graveknight 10 Graveknight Undead Common 190
Guardian naga 10 Naga Aberration Uncommon
243
Gug 10 Gug Aberration Common 198
Mammoth 10 Elephant Animal Common 154
Nilith 10 Nilith Aberration Common
245
Ofalth 10 Ofalth Aberration Common 25
1
Raja rakshasa 10 Rakshasa Fiend Common 275
Roper 10
Roper Aberration Uncommon 282
Shield archon 10 Archon Celestial Common 29
Troll king 10
Troll Giant Common 314
Tyrannosaurus 10 Dinosaur Animal Common 100
Young red dragon 10 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 112
Young silver dragon 10 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 126
Adult black dragon 11 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 105
Adult brass dragon 11 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 118
Cloud giant 11 Giant Giant Common 173
Deadly mantis 11 Mantis Animal Common 233
Elemental avalanche 11 Elemental, earth Elemental Common 147
Elemental hurricane 11 Elemental, air Elemental Common 145
Elemental inferno 11 Elemental, fir
e Elemental Common 149
Elemental tsunami 11 Elemental, water Elemental Common 153
Goliath spider 11 Spider Animal Common 307
Greater nightmare 11 Nightmar
e Fiend Common
244
357
Introduction
A-CD
E-G
H-K
L-N
O-R
S-T
U-Z
Appendix
Bestiary
356
Stone golem 11 Golem Construct Uncommon 187
Young gold dragon 11 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 12
4
Adult copper dragon 12 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 122
Adult green dragon 12 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 110
Cauthooj 12 Cauthooj Beast Common 55
Gimmerling 12 Gimmerling
Fey Uncommon 17
7
Gogiteth 12 Gogiteth Aberration Common 183
Great cyclops 12
Cyclops Giant Uncommon 69
Kolyarut 12 Aeon Monitor Common 10
Lich 12 Lich Undead Rar
e 220
Sea serpent 12 Sea serpent Animal Uncommon 288
Shuln 12 Shuln Beast Rar
e 294
Shining child 12 Shining child Astral Common 292
Adult blue dragon 13 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 108
Adult bronze dragon 13 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 120
Dryad queen 13 Nymph
Fey Uncommon
249
Ghaele 13 Azata Celestial Common 33
Glabrezu 13 Demon Fiend Common 79
Gelugon 13 Devil Fiend Common 91
Iron golem 13 Golem Construct Uncommon 188
Purple worm 13 Cave worm Beast Common 56
Storm giant 13 Giant Giant Common 174
Adult red dragon 14 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Common 112
Adult silver dragon 14 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 126
Astral deva 14 Angel Celestial Common 18
Crag linnorm 14 Linnorm Dragon Uncommon 22
4
Grikkitog 14 Grikkitog Aberration Common 195
Veiled master 14 Alghollthu Aberration Rar
e 14
Uthul 14 Uthul Elemental Common 317
Adult gold dragon 15 Dragon, metallic Dragon Common 12
4
Ancient white dragon 15 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Uncommon 115
Azure worm 15 Cave worm Animal Uncommon
5
7
Demilich 15 Lich Undead Rar
e 222
Morrigna 15 Psychopomp Monitor Common 270
Mukradi 15 Mukradi Beast Common 239
Phoenix 15 Phoenix Beast Rar
e 261
Quelaunt 15 Quelaunt Aberration Common 273
Wemmuth 15 Wemmuth Plant Common 326
Ancient black dragon 16 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Uncommon 106
Ancient brass dragon 16 Dragon, metallic Dragon Uncommon 118
Astradaemon 16 Daemon Fiend Common 72
Lesser death 16 Grim Reaper Undead Rar
e 197
Rune giant 16 Giant Giant Uncommon 174
Shemhazian 16 Demon Fiend Common 80
Warsworn 16 Warsworn Undead Uncommon 323
Zaramuun 16 Zaramuun Elemental Common 339
Ancient copper dragon 17 Dragon, metallic Dragon Uncommon 122
Ancient green dragon 17 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Uncommon 110
Banshee 17 Banshee Undead Uncommon 34
Ice linnorm 17 Linnorm Dragon Uncommon 225
Keketar 17 Protean Monitor Common 268
Marilith 17 Demon Fiend Common 81
Wendigo 17
Wendigo Beast Uncommon 327
Adamantine golem 18 Golem Construct Rar
e 188
Ancient blue dragon 18 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Uncommon 108
Ancient bronze dragon 18 Dragon, metallic Dragon Uncommon 120
Crimson worm 18 Cave worm Beast Rar
e 58
357

356
Kraken 18 Kraken Beast Uncommon 214
Shoggoth 18 Shoggoth Aberration Rare 293
Simurgh 18 Simurgh Beast Rare 295
Skulltaker 18 Skulltaker Undead Uncommon 300
Ancient red dragon 19 Dragon, chromatic Dragon Uncommon 112
Ancient silver dragon 19 Dragon, metallic Dragon Uncommon 127
Guthallath 19 Guthallath Construct Rare 199
Terotricus 19 Terotricus Fungus Rare 311
Ancient gold dragon 20 Dragon, metallic Dragon Uncommon 125
Balor 20 Demon Fiend Common 82
Baomal 20 Baomal Aberration Common 35
Pit fiend 20 Devil Fiend Common 92
Pleroma 20 Aeon Monitor Common 10
Tarn linnorm 20 Linnorm Dragon Uncommon 226
Grim Reaper 21 Grim Reaper Undead Unique 196
Mu spore 21 Mu spore Fungus Common 238
Tor linnorm 21 Linnorm Dragon Uncommon 227
Treerazer 25 Treerazer Fiend Unique 312
This product is compliant with the Open Game License (OGL) and is suitable for use with the Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game (Second Edition).
Product Identity: The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the Open Game
License version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and are not Open Game Content: All trademarks, registered trademarks, proper
nouns (characters, deities, locations, etc., as well as all adjectives, names, titles, and descriptive terms derived
from proper nouns), artworks, characters, dialogue, locations, organizations, plots, storylines, and trade dress.
(Elements that have previously been designated as Open Game Content, or are exclusively derived from previous
Open Game Content, or that are in the public domain are not included in this declaration.)
Open Game Content: Except for material designated as Product Identity (see above), the game mechanics of this
Paizo game product are Open Game Content, as defined in the Open Game License version 1.0a, Section 1(d).
No portion of this work other than the material designated as Open Game Content may be reproduced in any
form without written permission.
Pathfinder Bestiary (Second Edition) © 2019, Paizo Inc. All Rights Reserved. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem
logo, Pathfinder, the Pathfinder logo, Pathfinder Society, and Starfinder are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
Pathfinder Adventure Card Game, Pathfinder Adventure Card Society, Pathfinder Adventure Path, Pathfinder
Adventures, Pathfinder Cards, Pathfinder Combat Pad, Pathfinder Flip-Mat, Pathfinder Flip-Tiles, Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game, Pathfinder World Guide, the Pathfinder P logo, and Starfinder Society are trademarks of
Paizo Inc.
Printed in China.
OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
(“Wizards”). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a) “Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open
Game Content; (b) “Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations
(including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade,
improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or
adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or
otherwise distribute; (d) “Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures,
processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement
over the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and
means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but
specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means product and product line names, logos and
identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts, creatures, characters, stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements,
dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes
and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells,
enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments,
creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any
other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product
Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) “Trademark” means the logos, names, mark,
sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated products
contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using” means to use, Distribute,
copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) “You”
or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open
Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open
Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the
License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content,
You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the
rights conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include
the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing,
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of
any original Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility,
except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product
Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark
in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent
Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open
Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product
Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work
that you are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You
may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally
distributed under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content
You distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect
to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may
not Use any Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and
fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the
termination of this License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed
only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
System Reference Document © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors: Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, and
Skip Williams, based on material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
Daemon, Guardian from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and
distributed by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian McDowall.
Dark Creeper from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed
by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Rik Shepard.
Dark Stalker from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed
by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Simon Muth.
Dragon, Faerie from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed
by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Brian Jaeger and Gary Gygax.
Genie, Marid from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed
by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.
Mite from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed by Frog
God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Ian Livingstone and Mark Barnes.
Pathfinder Bestiary (Second Edition) © 2019, Paizo Inc.; Authors: Alexander Augunas, Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
John Compton, Paris Crenshaw, Adam Daigle, Eleanor Ferron, Leo Glass, Thurston Hillman, James Jacobs, Jason Keeley,
Lyz Liddell, Ron Lundeen, Robert G. McCreary, Tim Nightengale, Stephen Radney-MacFarland, Alex Riggs, David N.
Ross, Michael Sayre, Mark Seifter, Chris S. Sims, Jeffrey Swank, Jason Tondro, Tonya Woldridge, and Linda Zayas-Palmer.
PAIZO INC.
Creative Directors • James Jacobs, Robert G. McCreary, and Sarah E. Robinson
Director of Game Design • Jason Bulmahn
Managing Developers • Adam Daigle and Amanda Hamon
Organized Play Lead Developer • John Compton
Developers • Eleanor Ferron, Jason Keeley, Luis Loza, Ron Lundeen, Joe Pasini,
Patrick Renie, Michael Sayre, Chris S. Sims, and Linda Zayas-Palmer
Starfinder Design Lead • Owen K.C. Stephens
Starfinder Society Developer • Thurston Hillman
Senior Designer • Stephen Radney-MacFarland
Designers • Logan Bonner and Mark Seifter
Managing Editor • Judy Bauer
Editors • James Case, Leo Glass, Lyz Liddell, Adrian Ng, Lacy Pellazar, and
Jason Tondro
Art Director • Sonja Morris
Senior Graphic Designers • Emily Crowell and Adam Vick
Production Artist • Tony Barnett
Franchise Manager • Mark Moreland
Project Manager • Gabriel Waluconis
Paizo CEO • Lisa Stevens
Chief Creative Officer • Erik Mona
Chief Financial Officer • John Parrish
Chief Operations Officer • Jeffrey Alvarez
Chief Technical Officer • Vic Wertz
Director of Sales • Pierce Watters
Sales Associate • Cosmo Eisele
Vice President of Marketing & Licensing • Jim Butler
Marketing Manager • Dan Tharp
Licensing Manager • Glenn Elliott
Public Relations Manager • Aaron Shanks
Customer Service & Community Manager • Sara Marie
Operations Manager • Will Chase
Organized Play Manager • Tonya Woldridge
Human Resources Generalist • Angi Hodgson
Accountant • Christopher Caldwell
Data Entry Clerk • B. Scott Keim
Director of Technology • Raimi Kong
Web Production Manager • Chris Lambertz
Senior Software Developer • Gary Teter
Webstore Coordinator • Rick Kunz
Customer Service Team • Katina Davis, Virginia Jordan, Samantha Phelan, and
Diego Valdez
Warehouse Team • Laura Wilkes Carey, Mika Hawkins, Heather Payne, Jeff Strand, and
Kevin Underwood
Website Team • Brian Bauman, Robert Brandenburg, Whitney Chatterjee, Erik Keith,
Josh Thornton, and Andrew White

HARDCOVER $36.99
THIS COMPREHENSIVE HARDCOVER OVERVIEW OF THE WORLD OF PATHFINDER PROVIDES EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW
FOR A LIFETIME OF ADVENTURE IN THE AGE OF LOST OMENS. THE GOD OF HUMANITY IS DEAD AND PROPHECY IS BROKEN,
LEAVING HEROES JUST LIKE YOU TO CARVE THEIR OWN DESTINIES OUT OF AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE!
Lost Omens
World Guide
Second Edition
© 2019, Paizo Inc. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem logo, Path	 nder, and the Path	 nder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Path	 nder P logo, Path	 nder Adventure Path, Path	 nder Roleplaying Game, and Path	 nder World Guide are trademarks of Paizo Inc. paizo.com/pathfi nder
PZO9301 Lost Omens AD.indd 1 3/26/19 4:50 PM
BASED ON MORE THAN 10 YEARS OF ACTIVE DEVELOPMENT AND PLAYTEST FEEDBACK FROM MORE THAN 125,000
GAMERS, THE NEW PATHFINDER RULES ARE EASY TO LEARN AND EXCITING TO MASTER! THIS INDISPENSABLE VOLUME
CONTAINS ALL RULES PLAYERS AND GAME MASTERS NEED TO START THEIR ADVENTURES.
Core Rulebook
HARDCOVER $59.99 and Deluxe Hardcover $79.99
© 2019, Paizo Inc. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem logo, Path	 nder, and the Path	 nder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Path	 nder P logo, Path	 nder Adventure Path, Path	 nder Roleplaying Game, and Path	 nder World Guide are trademarks of Paizo Inc.
Second Edition
paizo.com/pathfi nder
PZO2101 PAZIO PF2 Ad.indd 1 4/3/19 3:29 PM
Bestiary
Second Edition
Bestiary
Rulebook
Unleash the Beasts
Over 400 of fantasy’s fiercest foes burst from the pages of this enormous
compendium of the most popular and commonly encountered creatures in the
world of Pathfinder! From familiar enemies like orcs, dragons, and vampires to
new horrors like the nightmarish nilith and the three-headed mukradi, to suitable
servants for summoners of every alignment, this must-have companion to the
Pathfinder Core Rulebook is crawling with creatures to challenge characters of
any level.
PZO2102
paizo.com/pathfinder Printed in China.
Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter